 Examples 1 1 DHP 118 		 puññañ’ce puriso kayirā,  kayirāth’enaṃ punappunaṃ.tamhi chandaṃ kayirātha, sukho puññassa uccayo. puññañ’ce	 	n 		nt.ac.s 	merit; righteousnesspuriso 		n 		m.n.s 	a male; a mankayirā 		v 		opt.3.s 	could do, should makekayirātha-		v. refl 	opt.3.s.	one should make by oneselfenaṃ 		pn 		m.ac.s 	thispunappunaṃ 	ind				again and againman should make merit, he should make by oneself this again and againtamhi		 	pn		m.loc.s 	in thatchandaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	impulse; will; wishkayirātha 		v. refl		opt.3.s.	one should make by oneselfsukho 		n 		m.n.s		happiness; easepuññassa 		n 		nt.gen.s 	of merit; righteousnessuccayo		n		m.n.s		accumulationone should make by oneself wish for that, accumulation of merit is happiness.2. (KN 6.52)“sāhaṃ nūna ito gantvā, yoniṃ laddhāna mānusiṃ.vadaññū sīlasampannā, kāhāmi kusalaṃ bahuṃ.  so			pn		m.n.s		that, heahaṃ 		pn		1.n.s		Inūna 			ind				indeed; surely; certainly.ito 			ind				from here; from now; hencegantvā, 		v		abs		having goneyoniṃ 		n		f.ac.s		origin, way of birth, place of birth, realm of 									existence; natureladdhāna 		v		abs		having got, received, or attainedmānusiṃ.		n		f.ac.s		a womanvadaññū 		adj				lit. "(easily) spoken to," addressable, 										i. e. liberal bountiful, kindsīlasampannā, 	adj				observing the moral preceptskāhāmi 		v		fut.1.s	I will do, makekusalaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	good action; meritbahuṃ.		adj		nt.ac.s	much; manyindeed I going from here, having got woman’s womb (human existent), liberal  and observing the moral precepts, I will make a lot of merit.3. Thig 247. (KN 9.65) “mā’kāsi pāpakaṃ kammaṃ, āvi vā yadi vā raho.sace ca pāpakaṃ kammaṃ, karissasi karosi vā. mā’kāsi 		ind+aor.3.s			do not dopāpakaṃ 		adj		nt.ac.s	bad, wicked, wretched, sinfulkammaṃ, 		n		nt.ac.s	deed; action; job; workāvi 			ind				openly; before one's eyesvā 			ind				oryadi 			ind				and evenvā 			ind				orraho.  		ind				secretly; in secretsace 			ind				ifca 			ind		conj		andpāpakaṃ 		adj		nt.ac.s	bad, wicked, wretched, sinfulkammaṃ, 		n		nt.ac.s	deed; action; job; workkarissasi 		v		fut.2.s	you will do, makekarosi 		v		pr.2.s		you make, dovā. 			ind				ordo not do bad deed,  openly or even secretly, but if you do or will do bad deed    3. Thig 509  (KN 9.73)			   kāhinti khu taṃ kāmā, chātā sunakhaṃva caṇḍālā.kāhinti 		v		fut.3.pl	 (they) will do, make, actkhu = kho		ind				indeed; really; surelytaṃ 			pn		2.ac.s	youkāmā, 		n		m.n.pl	sensual desireschātā 		adj		m.n.pl	hungrysunakhaṃ’va 	n		m.ac.s	as dogcaṇḍālā.		n		m.n.pl	outcastes or untouchablesindeed sensual desires will act with you as, hungry outcastes with dog.5. Dhpv 154		 gahakāraka diṭṭhosi, puna gehaṃ na kāhasi.gahakāraka 	n		m.voc.s	house-builder.diṭṭho-		pp				seen; found; understoodasi, 			v		pr.2.s		you arepuna 			ind				againgehaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	house; dwelling placena 			ind		neg		notkāhasi.		v		fut.2.s	you will makehouse-builder, you are seen, again you will not make a house  6. Ja (KN 14.503) or iti (KN 4.76) “yādisaṃ kurute mittaṃ, yādisaṃ cūpasevati. sa ve tādisako hoti, sahavāso hi tādiso.  yādisaṃ		adj		m.ac.s	whichever; whatever; which like. kurute 		v.refl		pr.3.s		does, makes, acts		mittaṃ, 		n		m.ac.s	friendyādisaṃ		adj		m.ac.s	whichever; whatever; which like.  ca-			ind				andupasevati.		v		pr.3.s		practises; frequents; associatessa ve 			ind				indeed; truly; surely.tādisako		adj		m.n.s		such; of such quality. hoti, 			v		pr.3.s		there is, he issahavāso 		n		m.n.s		 living together.hi 			ind				indeedtādiso. 		adj		m.n.s		 such; of such quality, such aswhatever (person) he makes a friend with,  whatever (person) he associates with, that indeed he is of such quality, indeed such as co-habitant  7.  (SN 1.32)	duddadaṃ dadamānānaṃ, dukkaraṃ kamma kubbataṃ.asanto nānukubbanti, sataṃ dhammo durannayoduddadaṃ 		adj		m.ac.s	difficult to givedadamānānaṃ, 	pr.p		m.gen.pl	of (when) giving; offering; 			dukkaraṃ		adj		m.ac.s	difficult to do. kamma- 		n				deed; action; job; workkubbataṃ.		pr.p		m.n.s		doing, making, performing			asanto 		adj		m.n.s		unvirtuous, wicked, badna-anukubbanti, 	v		pr.3.pl	they not imitates, do likewise, "do after", 									emulate	sataṃ 		adj		m.gen.pl	of virtuous, gooddhammo 		n		m.n.s		Teachingdurannayo		adj		m.n.s		difficult to followwhen giving what is difficult to give, he doing what is difficult to do, bad not do likewise, Teaching of the good is difficult to follow.“The bad do not emulate the good,Who give what is hard to giveAnd do deeds hard to do:The Dhamma of the good is hard to follow. BB8. SN 1.31 sabbhi’r’eva samāsetha, sabbhi kubbetha santhavaṃ.sabbhi-		adj		m.ins.pl	with virtuouseva 			ind				justsamāsetha, 	v.refl		opt.3.s	could associate; combinesabbhi 		adj		m.ins.pl	with virtuouskubbetha 		v.refl		opt.3.s	could do, make, actsanthavaṃ.	n		m.ac.s	acquaintance, intimacy just with virtuous he should associate, with virtuous he should make intimacy.9. Ap (KN 10.24)dhātu āveṇikā natthi, sarīraṃ ekapiṇḍitaṃ.imamhi buddhathūpamhi, kassāma kañcukaṃ mayaṃ. dhātu 		n		f.n.pl		elementāveṇikā 		adj		f.n.pl		special; exceptional; separatenatthi, 		v		pr.3.pl	there are nosarīraṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	body, a corpse ekapiṇḍitaṃ.	adj		nt.ac.s	compounded in a single lumpimamhi 		pn		m.ins.pl	with thesebuddha-		n				the Buddhathūpamhi, 		n		m.ins.pl	with stupas, pagodaskassāma 		v		fut.1.pl	we will dokañcukaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	armourmayaṃ. 		pn		1.n.pl		wethere are no separate elements, body compounded in a single lump, by this Buddha’s stupas, we will make a armour.10.  (SN 22.99) seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, sā gaddulabaddho daḷhe khīle vā thambhe vā upanibaddho tameva khīlaṃ vā thambhaṃ vā anuparidhāvati anuparivattati;seyyathāpi, 	ind				just asbhikkhave, 		n		m.voc.pl	o monkssā 			pn		m.n.s		dog						gaddula-		n				a leash; leather strapbaddho 		pp		m.n.s		bound; trapped; fastened; combineddaḷhe 		adj		m.loc.s	firm; strong; steady.khīle 			n		m.loc.s	in peg; a stake; a postvā 			ind				orthambhe 		n		m.loc.s	in pillar; post; a clump of grass; obduracy.vā 			ind				or upanibaddho 	pp		m.n.s		tied on to tam’eva 		pn		m.ac.s	that justkhīlaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	peg; a stake; a post vā 			ind				or thambhaṃ  	n		m.ac.s	in pillar; post; a clump of grass; obduracy.vā  			ind				oranuparidhāvati	v		pr.3.s		runs up and down or aroundanuparivattati;	v		pr.3.s		move round and round; keep on rollingJust as a dog, tied by a leash to a post or stake, keeps running around and circling around that very post or stake11. (MN 130)dīghassa addhuno accayena tassa mahānirayassa puratthimaṃ dvāraṃ avāpurīyatidīghassa 		adj		m.gen.s	of longaddhuno 		n		m.gen.s	of timeaccayena 		ind		adv		by the elapse oftassa 		pn		m.gen.s	of that, of himmahānirayassa	n		m.gen.s	the great hell.  puratthimaṃ 	adj		m.ac.s	easterndvāraṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	gateavāpurīyati		v.pass	pr.3.s		is openedby the elapse of a long time, eastern gate of that great hell is opened.12.  (SN 6.5)atha kho bhagavā tassa brahmuno upari vehāsaṃ pallaṅkena nisīdi tejodhātuṃ samāpajjitvā.atha kho 		ind				and thenbhagavā 		n		m.n.s		the Blessed One, the Buddha.tassa 		pn		m.dat.s	to thatbrahmuno 		n		m.dat.s	to the Brahma; the Creatorupari 			ind				above; on; upon; upper; overheadvehāsaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	 the skypallaṅkena 	n		m.ins.s	with a cross-legged sittingnisīdi 		v		aor.3.s	sat downtejodhātuṃ 	n		f.ac.s		 element of heat.samāpajjitvā.	v		abs		having entered uponand then  the Blessed One sat down with cross-legged above that Brahma in the sky, having entered upon the element of heat.  13. (SN 6.5)atha kho āyasmā mahāmoggallāno taṃ brahmānaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi atha kho  		ind				and thenāyasmā 		adj		m.n.s		venerable	mahāmoggallāno n		m.n.s		Great Moggalanataṃ 			pn		m.ac.s	thatbrahmānaṃ 	n		m.ac.s	brahmangāthāya 		n		f.ins.s	with verse, stanza, line of poetryajjhabhāsi		v		aor.3.s	addressed; spokeand then  venerable Great Moggalana  addressed that brahman  with verse.14. (SN 6.6)addasā kho so brahmā te brahmāno dūratova āgacchante. addasā		v		imp.3.s	he has seen kho 			ind				indeedso 			n		m.n.s		that, hebrahmā		n		m.n.s		the Brahma; the Creator.te 			n		m.ac.pl	thosebrahmāno 		n		m.ac.pl	Brahmasdūrato’va		ind				just from afar  āgacchante. 	pr.p		m.ac.pl	coming; approaching. indeed that Brahma has seen those Brahmas coming just from afar  15.  (SN 6.4)sataṃ sahassānaṃ nirabbudānaṃ,āyuṃ pajānāmi tavāhaṃ brahme”ti.sataṃ 		adj		nt.ac.s	100sahassānaṃ 	n		m.gen.pl	of thousandnirabbudānaṃ,	n		m.gen.pl	vast number, Nirabbudasāyuṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	agepajānāmi 		v		pr.1.s		I know clearly.tava-			pn		2.gen.s	yourahaṃ			pn		1.n.s		I brahme		n		m.voc.s	o Brahma”ti. 			ind				“”O Brahma, I know clearly your age is a 100 of thousand Nirabbudas.16.  (DN 14.12)‘sele yathā pabbatamuddhaniṭṭhito, yathāpi passe janataṃ samantato.sele 			n		m.loc.s	on the rockyathā 		ind				like, aspabbata-		n				a mountain; rockmuddhani-		adj		loc		on the top ofṭ’ṭhito, 		pp		m.n.s		stood; stayed; stationary; immovableyathā’pi 		ind				and as; likepasse 		v		opt.3.s	he could seejanataṃ 		n		f.ac.s		populace, peoplesamantato.		ind				all around; everywhereon the rock, like on the top of the mountain, standing, and just as he could see people everywhere.17. DhAtvaṃ yuvā balasampanno, kiṃ tayā bhatiṃ katvāpi yathābalaṃ dānaṃ dātuṃ na vaṭṭatī”ti?tvaṃ 			pn		2.n.s		youyuvā 			n		m.n.s		youth, youngbala-			n				strength; powersampanno, 	adj		m.n.s		possessed ofkiṃ 			pn				what?tayā 			pn		2.ins.s	by youbhatiṃ 		n		f.ac.s		wages, fee, paykatvā’pi 		v		abs		and having done or madeyathābalaṃ 	ind		adv		according to one's strengthdānaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	gift; charity; alms; alms-givingdātuṃ 		v		inf		 to give; to offerna 			ind		neg		notvaṭṭatī”ti? 		v		pr.3.s		behoves; to be right, fit, or proper; turns round	you young, possessed of strength, what wages having made by you? It is not proper to give alms according to one's strength? 18.  (SN 3.11)  saṃvāsena kho, mahārāja, sīlaṃ veditabbaṃ. tañca kho dīghena addhunā, na ittaraṃsaṃvāsena 	n		m.ins.s	by living with, co-residencekho, 			ind				indeed; really; surelymahārāja, 		v		m.voc.s	o great kingsīlaṃ 		n		nt.n.s		character, habit behaviourveditabbaṃ. 	pt.p		nt.n.s		can be knowntañ’ca 		pn		nt.n.s		and thatkho			ind				indeed; really; surely dīghena 		adj		m.ins.s	by longaddhunā, 		n		m.ins.s	by timena 			ind		neg		notittaraṃ		adj		m.ac.s	shorto great king, indeed by living with character can be known. and that indeed by long time, not in short.	19. (DN 3.7)sace tvaṃ na vyākarissasi, ... etth’eva te sattadhā muddhā phalissati.sace 			ind				iftvaṃ 			pn		2.n.s		youna 			ind		neg		notvyākarissasi	v		fut.2.s	you will explain; declare; answer	ettha’eva		ind				right here te 			pn		2.gen.s	yoursattadhā 		ind		adv		in seven piecesmuddhā 		n		f.n.s		headphalissati.		v		fut.3.s	will splitif you will not answer, right here your head will split in seven pieces20. Apa  (KN 10.8) “yathā balākayonimhi, na vijjati pumā sadā.meghesu gajjamānesu, gabbhaṃ gaṇhanti tā sadā. yathā 		ind				just as, likebalākayonimhi, 	n		f.loc.s	in species of crane na 			ind		neg		notvijjati 			v		pr.3.s		exists; to be foundpumā 		n		m.n.pl	mensadā.			ind		adv		ever; alwaysmeghesu		n		m.loc.pl	in cloudsgajjamānesu, 	pr.p		m.loc.pl	in roaring; thunderinggabbhaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	embryogaṇhanti		v		pr.3.pl	take; hold of; seize. tā 			pn		f.n.pl		theysadā.			ind		adv		ever; always just as in  in species of crane men can not be found ever, in thundering clouds, they ever become pregnant.21. Mil 6.4.8  ‘tadahu pabbajito santo, jātiyā sattavassiko.so pi maṃ anusāseyya, sampaṭicchāmi muddhanātadahu		ind				in the same day, that day pabbajito 		pp		m.n.s		ordained, gone forth, monksanto, 		adj		m.n.s		virtuousjātiyā 		n		f.abl.s	from birthsattavassiko.	adj		m.n.s		7 years oldso 			pn		m.n.s		hepi 			ind				justmaṃ 			pn		m.ac.s	meanusāseyya, 	v		opt.3.s	could advise; admonishesampaṭicchāmi 	v		pr.1.s		I receive; acceptmuddhanā		n		m.ins.s	with headin the same day virtuous monk, 7 years old from birth,  could advise me, I accept with head22. (DN 2.7)tattha natthi hantā vā ghātetā vā, sotā vā sāvetā vā, viññātā vā viññāpetā vā.tattha 		ind		adv		 there; in that placenatthi 		v		pr.3.s		there is nothantā 		n		m.n.s		striker, one who killsvā 			ind				orghātetā 		n		m.n.s		killer; destroyervā 			ind				or sotā 			n		m.n.s		hearervā 			ind				orsāvetā 		n		m.n.s		one who makes others hear, who tells,  tellervā 			ind				orviññātā 		n		m.n.s		a perceiver, one who apperceives or takes to heart, 							a learnervā 			ind				orviññāpetā 		n		m.n.s		an instructor, teacher vā 			ind				orThere is no striker or destroyer, hearer or teller, perceiver or instructor.
 Examples 21. KN-a Dhp 2.7mātugāmesu pana vigatacchandatāya tassā sālāya mātugāmānaṃ pattiṃ nādaṃsu.mātugāmesu 	n		m.loc.pl	in womans		pana 			ind				and; yet; but; and now; more overvigatacchandatāya 		f.dat.s	to the fact of having no desire.>vigata-		pp				 being without.>chandatāya	n		f.		 impulse; desire fortassā 		pn		f.gen.s	of that	sālāya 		n		f.gen.s	large hall, large room, house; shedmātugāmānaṃ 	n		m.dat.pl	to  womanspattiṃ 		n		f.ac.s		attainment; merit; profit; sharena-adaṃsu.	v		aor.3.pl	they did not givemoreover to the fact of having no liking to the womans, they did not give share of that  large hall to the womans.2. KN-a Dhp 3.4 “saṅgharakkhita, mātugāmassa pahāraṃ dātuṃ nāsakkhi, ko ettha mahallakattherassa doso”ti saṅgharakkhita, 	n		m.voc.s	Sangharakkhita Theramātugāmassa 	n		m.dat.s	to womanpahāraṃ 		n		m.ac.s	a blow; a strokedātuṃ 		v		inf		to givena-asakkhi, 	v 		aor.2.s	you were not able (to)ko 			pn		m.n.s		who? what? which?ettha 			ind				 here, in this placemahallaka-		adj				old, venerable, of great age, an old mantherassa 		n		m.gen.s	of an elder; a seniordoso”ti 		n		m.n.s		anger  Sangharakkhita Thera you were not able to give a blow to a woman, what here an anger to a venerable elder ?3. (SN 1.32)tasmā satañca asataṃ, nānā hoti ito gati.asanto nirayaṃ yanti, santo saggaparāyanā”ti.      tasmā 		ind				thereforesatañ’ca 		adj		m.gen.pl	of virtuousasataṃ, 		adj		m.gen.pl	of not virtuousnānā 			ind				different; differentlyhoti 			v		pr.3.s		there is, he isito 			ind				 from here; from now; hence.gati.			n		f.n.s		direction, courseasanto 		adj		m.n.pl	not virtuousnirayaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	hell, purgatoryyanti, 		v		pr.3.pl	they gosanto 		adj		m.n.pl	virtuoussagga-		n				a place of happiness; heavenparāyanā”ti. 	n		m.n.pl	going through to, ending in, aiming atdirection of the virtuous and not virtuous is different. Not virtuous go to hell, the virtuous ending in heaven.4. (AN 3.130)tīhi kho, anuruddha, dhammehi samannāgato mātugāmo kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā apāyaṃ duggatiṃ vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ upapajjati.tīhi 			adj		ins.pl		with three		kho, 			ind				indeedanuruddha, 	n		m.voc.s	o Anuruddhadhammehi 		n		m.ins.pl	with qualitiessamannāgato 	adj		m.n.s		endowed with; possessed ofmātugāmo 		n		m.n.s		womankāyassa 		n		m.gen.s	of bodybhedā 		n		m.abl.s	from breakingparaṃ 		ind		adv		aftermaraṇā 		n		nt.abl.s	from deathapāyaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	 the hell; state of loss and woeduggatiṃ		n		f.ac.s		a realm of miserable existence vinipātaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	a place of suffering a bad fallingnirayaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	the purgatory; hellupapajjati.		v		pr.3.s		she is reborn in; gets toindeed, o Anuruddha, woman endowed with three qualities after breaking of the body, (after) death is reborn in hell, realm of miserable existence, place of suffering, purgatory.    5. Vin ; cūḷavaggapāḷi ; 11.3tena kho pana samayena rājā udeno uyyāne paricāresi saddhiṃ orodhena. assosi kho rañño udenassa orodho — “amhākaṃ kira ācariyo ayyo ānando uyyānassa avidūre aññatarasmiṃ rukkhamūle nisinno”ti.tena 			pn		m.ins.s	by thatkho pana 		ind				and thansamayena 		n		m.ins.s	by occasion, timerājā 			n		m.n.s		kingudeno 		n		m.n.s		Udenauyyāne 		n		nt.loc.s	in a park; pleasure groveparicāresi 		v		aor.3.s	caused to amuse oneselfsaddhiṃ 		ind				together withorodhena. 		n		m.ins.s	with haremassosi 		v		aor.3.s	heardkho 			ind				indeedrañño 		n		m.gen.s	of kingudenassa 		n		m.gen.s	of Udenaorodho — 		n		m.n.s		 harem“amhākaṃ 		pn		1.gen.pl	ourkira 			ind				really; trulyācariyo 		n		m.n.s		teacherayyo 			adj		m.n.s		gentleman, sire, lord masterānando 		n		m.n.s		Anandauyyānassa 		n		m.gen.s	of a park; pleasure groveavidūre		ind				near; not far aññatarasmiṃ	adj		m.loc.s	in a certain; not well-known rukkhamūle 	n		nt.loc.s	in the foot of a treenisinno”ti.		pp		m.n.s		sat down, seatedand than at that time, king Udena caused to amuse oneself with harem in a pleasure grove. The harem heard from king Udena: truly our teacher, sire Ananda, seated in a certain foot of a tree near the park.  6.  (KN 5.6)“sehi dārehi asantuṭṭho, vesiyāsu padussati (padissati).dussati (dissati) paradāresu, taṃ parābhavato mukhaṃ”. sehi 			adj		m.ins.pl	with one’s ownsdārehi 		n		m.ins.pl	with wifesasantuṭṭho, 	pp		m.n.s		not contented with, unhappyvesiyāsu 		n		f.loc.pl	among harlots; a prostitutespadissati		v.pass	pr.3.s		is seen; appearsdissati		v.pass	pr.3.s		seems; appearsparadāresu, 	n		m.loc.pl	among somebody else's wifestaṃ 			pm		nt.n.s		that, heparābhavato 	prp		m.dat.s	for declining; going to ruin.mukhaṃ”. 		n		nt.n.s		cause, ways, reason“One not contented with his own wifes is seen among prostitutes,seen among the wifes of others: that is a cause for declining.” 7.  (SN 7.11)na kho mayaṃ passāma bhoto gotamassa yugaṃ vā naṅgalaṃ vā phālaṃ vā pācanaṃ (pājanaṃ) vā ... atha ca pana bhavaṃ gotamo evamāhana 			ind		neg		no, notkho 			ind				indeedmayaṃ 		pn		1.n.pl		wepassāma 		v		pr.1.pl	see; find; understandbhoto 		adj		m.gen.s	of Sir, Lord, venerablegotamassa 	n		m.gen.s	of Gotamayugaṃ vā 		n		nt.ac.s	yoke ornaṅgalaṃ vā 	n		nt.ac.s	plough orphālaṃ vā 		n		nt.ac.s	ploughshare orpācanaṃ		n		nt.ac.s	goad, stickatha 			ind				 then; and also.ca 			ind		conj		andpana 			ind				and; yet; but; and now; moreoverbhavaṃ 		adj		m.n.s		Sir, Lord, venerablegotamo 		n		m.n.s		Gotamaevaṃ-		ind				thus; in this wayāha			v		perf.3.s	he has saidindeed we not see Sir Gotama’s yoke or plough or ploughshare or goad, and moreover Sir Gotama has said in this way8.  (DN 3.15)	 seyyathāpi, bho gotama, nikkujjitaṃ vā ukkujjeyya, paṭicchannaṃ vā vivareyya, mūḷhassa vā maggaṃ ācikkheyya, andhakāre vā telapajjotaṃ dhāreyya, ‘cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhantī’ti; evamevaṃ bhotā gotamena anekapariyāyena dhammo pakāsito.seyyathāpi, 	ind				just asbho gotama, 	n		m.voc.s	O Sir Gotamanikkujjitaṃ	 	adj		m.ac.s	lying face downward, overturned, upset fallen 								over, 	stumbledvā			ind				orukkujjeyya,		v		opt.3.s	may raise up, could set upright  paṭicchannaṃ	pp		m.ac.s	covered, concealed, hiddenvā			ind				orvivareyya, 	 	v		opt.3.s	could open; may uncover; can make clearmūḷhassa 		adj		m.gen.s	gone astray, erring, having lost one's wayvā			ind				or maggaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	path; road; wayācikkheyya, 	v		opt.3.s	could tell, may show, can explainandhakāre 		n		m.loc.s	in darkness; bewilderment.vā			ind				or telapajjotaṃ 	n		m.ac.s	an oil lamp dhāreyya, 		v		opt.3.s	could carry, may hold‘cakkhumanto 	adj		m.n.pl	endowed with eyes.rūpāni 		n		nt.ac.pl	formsdakkhantī’ti;	v		pr.3.pl	they seeevamevaṃ 	ind				in the same waybhotā gotamena 	n		m.ins.s	by Sir Gotama anekapariyāyena n		m.ins.s	by various waysdhammo 		n		m.n.s		Teachingpakāsito.		pp		m.n.s		explained, manifested, made knownO Sir Gotama, just as if one may set up what had been overturned, or could show the way to one who had got lost, or could bring an oil-lamp into a darkness, so that those with eyes could see forms. In the same way the Dhamma  has expounded by Sir Gotama in various ways.9. KN-a Dhp, 1.2bhoti sace vejjaṃ ānessāmi, bhattavetanaṃ dātabbaṃ bhavissatibhoti 			n		f.voc.s	Dear Madamsace 			ind				ifvejjaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	physician; doctorānessāmi, 		v		fut.1.s	I will bring; fetchbhattavetanaṃ 	n		nt.n.s		food and feesdātabbaṃ 		ptp		nt.n.s		fit to be given.bhavissati		v		fut.3.s	will beDear Madam, if I will fetch a doctor, the food and fees will be fit to be given.10.  (DN 20.2)“ye nāgarāje sahasā haranti, dibbā dijā pakkhi visuddhacakkhū.ye 			pn		m.ac.pl	those nāgarāje 		n		m.ac.pl	kings of the Nāgas.sahasā 		ind				 suddenly; forciblyharanti, 		v		pr.3.pl	they carry; take away; plunderdibbā 		adj		m.n.pl	 divine; celestialdijā 			n		m.n.pl	a twice born;pakkhi 		adj		m.n.s		the winged onevisuddha-		adj				clean; pure; bright; stainless; sanctifiedcakkhū.		adj		m.n.pl 	having eye, visionthey carry away those kings of the Nāgas, a twice born divine winged one beings with pure vision.11. (DN 20.2)cattāro te mahārājā, samantā caturo disā.daddaḷhamāna aṭṭhaṃsu, vane kāpilavatthave. cattāro 		adj		m.n.pl	fourte 			pn		m.n.pl	thosemahārājā, 		n		m.n.pl	great kings		samantā 		ind				all around; everywherecaturo 		adj		m.n.pl	fourdisā.			n		f.n.pl		directiondaddaḷhamānā 	pr.p		m.n.pl	resplendent, blazing forthaṭṭhaṃsu, 		v		aor.3.pl	they stoodvane 			n		nt.loc.s	in wood; forestkāpilavatthave.	adj		nt.loc.s	in belonging to KapilavatthuThose four great kings stood in the forest belonging to Kapilavatthu, blazing forth in four direction all around, 12. (KN 8.262)“vuṭṭhamhi deve caturaṅgule tiṇe, saṃpupphite meghanibhamhi kānane.nagantare viṭapisamo sayissaṃ, taṃ me mudū hehiti tūlasannibhaṃ. vuṭṭhamhi 		pp		m.loc.s	when raineddeve 			n		m.loc.s	when skycaturaṅgule 	adj		m.loc.s	when measuring four inchestiṇe, 			n		nt.loc.s	when grasssaṃpupphite 	pp		nt.loc.s	when with flowers; fully blownmeghanibhamhi 	adj		nt.loc.s	when cloud-likekānane.		n		nt.loc.s	when forest; grove.nagantare 		n		m.loc.s	in a space between mountains.viṭapisamo 		adj		m.n.s		like a treesayissaṃ, 		v.reflex	fut.1.s	I will lie downtaṃ			pn		nt.n.s		thatme 			pn		1.dat.s	for memudū			adj		f.n.s		soft hehiti 		v		fut.3.s	it will betūlasannibhaṃ. 	adj		nt.n.s		resembling to cottonwhen the sky is raining, when grass is measuring four inches, when cloud-like grove fully blown, I will lie down like a tree between mountains, it will be for me soft resembling to cotton.13. (KN 8.262) 	 kadā nuhaṃ dubbacanena vutto, tatonimittaṃ vimano na hessaṃ.kadā 			ind		adv		 whennu-ahaṃ		pn		m.n.s		I indeed 		dubbacanena	n		nt.ins.s	with harsh wordvutto, 		pp		m.n.s		said, spokentatonimittaṃ 	ind				because of that, on that accountvimano 		adj		m.n.s		displeased; distractedna 			ind				nothessaṃ.		v.reflex	fut.1.s	I will beIndeed when I would be spoken with harsh word, I will be not  displeased on that account.14. (KN 8.262)  disvā samudayaṃ vibhavañca sambhavaṃ, dāyādako hehisi aggavādino.disvā 		v		abs		having seen; having found; having understood.samudayaṃ 	n		m.ac.s	rise, origination vibhavaṃ-		n		m.ac.s	non -- existence cessation of life, annihilationca 			ind				andsambhavaṃ, 	n		m.ac.s	origin, birth, production, sourcedāyādako 		adj		m.n.s		one who inheritshehisi 		v		fut.2.s 	you will beaggavādino.	n		m.gen.s	of the greastest teacherhaving seen origination, annihilation and source (of both), you will be one who inherits of the greastest teacher15.  (DN 16.36)pucchatha, bhikkhave, mā pacchā vippaṭisārino ahuvattha … na mayaṃ sakkhimhā bhagavantaṃ sammukhā paṭipucchitun’tipucchatha, 	v		imp.2.pl	you shold ask, may you askbhikkhave, 		n		m.voc.pl	o monks!mā 			ind				do notpacchā 		ind				afterwardsvippaṭisārino 	adj		m.gen.s	when  remorseful; repentantahuvattha 	 	v		aor.2.pl	you werena 			ind				notmayaṃ 		pn		1.n.s		wesakkhimhā 		v		aor.1.pl	we were ablebhagavantaṃ 	n		m.ac.s	the Blessed Onesammukhā 	ind				in front; face to face.paṭipucchituṃ	v		inf		to askYou should ask o monks! do not be remorseful afterwards… We were not able to ask  face to face the Blessed One. 16.  (SN 2.24)ahuvā me sagāmeyyo, ahuvā me pure sakhā”ti.ahuvā 		v.reflex	aor.3.s	he wasme 			pn		1.ins.s	with mesagāmeyyo, 	adj		m.n.s		of the same villageahuvā 		v.reflex	aor.3.s	he was me 			pn		1.ins.s	with mepure 			ind				before; formerly; earlier.sakhā”ti.		n		m.n.s		friendhe was with me of the same village, formerly he was friend with me.17.  (KN 6.82)“ahaṃ bhadante ahuvāsiṃ pubbe, sumedhanāmassa jinassa sāvako.ahaṃ 		pn		m.n.s		Ibhadante 		n		m.voc.s	o venerable, reverendahuvāsiṃ 		v		aor.1.s	I waspubbe, 		ind				formerly; in the pastsumedha-		n				Sumedhanāmassa 		n		m.gen.s	of the namejinassa 		n		m.gen.s	of the conqueror; the victor; the Buddhasāvako.		n		m.n.s		student, discipleo venerable,  formerly I was  student of the Buddha, with name Sumedha. 18.   (KN 9.73)pabbajjā vā hohiti, maraṇaṃ vā me na ceva vāreyyaṃ.pabbajjā 		n		f.n.s		becoming a monkvā			ind				orhohiti, 		v		fut.3.s	is will bemaraṇaṃ 		n		nt.n.s		deathvā			ind				orme 			pn		1.gen.s	myna 			ind				notca-eva		ind				and only			 vāreyyaṃ.		n		nt.n,s		betrothal, marriage, weddingis will be my death or becoming a monk, and only not a marriage.  19.   (DN 16.32)katapuñño’si tvaṃ, ānanda, padhānamanuyuñja, khippaṃ hohisi anāsavo”ti. katapuñño’si 	adj				one who has performed meritorious actionstvaṃ, 		pn		2.n.s		youānanda, 		n		m.voc.s	Anandapadhānaṃ-		n				exertion, energetic effort, strivinganuyuñja, 		v		imp.2.s	you should practice, engage (in)khippaṃ		ind				quicklyhohisi 		v		fut.2.s	you will beanāsavo”ti. 	adj		m.n.s		free from intoxicants; passionless, effluentsAnanda, you one who has performed meritorious actions,  you should engage in energetic effort, quickly you will be free from effluents. 20. (MN 85)upako ājīvako ‘huveyya p’āvuso’ti vatvā sīsaṃ okampetvā ummaggaṃ gahetvā pakkāmi.upako 		n		m.n.s		Upakaājīvako 		n		m.n.s		a kind of non-Buddhist ascetics.‘huveyya- 		v		opt.3.s	it may beāvuso’ti 		n		m.voc.s	friend; brothervatvā 		v		abs		having told or said.sīsaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	headokampetvā 	v		abs		having shakenummaggaṃ 	n		m.ac.s	a side track, devious way gahetvā 		v		abs		having taken; having held of; having seized.pakkāmi.		v		aor.3.s	 he went forthascetic Upaka  having told: ‘it may be, friend.’ having shaken head,  having taken  a devious way, he went forth. 21.  (MN 54.2)sāmikā yattha yatth’eva sāni passeyyuṃ tattha tatth’eva sāni hareyyuṃsāmikā 		n		m.n.pl	husbands; the ownersyattha 		ind				wherever; whereyattha-		ind				wherever; where’eva 			ind				just, only, evensāni 			n		nt.ac.pl	one’s own thingspasseyyuṃ 	v		opt.3.pl	they could seetattha 		ind				there; in that placetattha- 		ind				there; in that place’eva 			ind				just, only, evensāni 			n		nt.ac.pl	one’s own thingshareyyuṃ		v		opt.3.pl	they could takethe owners when they could see their own things, they could take them.22. Dhpv 136   atha pāpāni kammāni, karaṃ bālo na bujjhati.sehi kammehi dummedho, aggidaḍḍhova tappati. atha			ind				then; and also, even 			pāpāni		adj		nt.ac.pl	evil 			kammāni		n		nt.ac.pl	deeds; actions √kar + ma + ani			karaṃ (karanta) 	pr.p		m.n.s		doing √kar 7 o (to do, make) + aṃ			bālo			n		m.n.s		fool, ignorent			na			ind		not			bujjhati.		v		pr.3.s		knows; understands; perceives; is awake 									 √budh 3 ya (to know)> bujjha + ti			sehi			pn		nt.ins.pl	by one’s own			kammehi		n		nt.ins.pl	by deeds; actions 			dummedho		n		m.n.s		foolish, unwise  du + √medh 1 a (to be wise) + a		aggi-daḍḍho’va	pp		m.n.s		like burnt by a fire			tappati		v.pass	pr.3.s		is burnt, tormented √tap 1 ya (to burn)>tappa(pb)			even when doing evil deeds, the fool is not aware.  The unwise is tormented by his own deeds, as if burned by a fire. 						
 Examples 31. Vin 1.6ahañhi arahā loke, ahaṃ satthā anuttaro.ekomhi sammāsambuddho, sītibhūtosmi nibbuto. ahaṃ-			pn 		1.n.s		I		hi 				ind				indeedarahā 			adj		m.n.pl	worthy of; deservingloke, 				n		m.loc.s	in worldahaṃ 			pn 		1.n.s		Isatthā 			n		m.n.s		teacheranuttaro.			adj		m.n.s		 incomparable; unsurpassed, "nothing higher"eko-				adj				one, aloneamhi 				pr		pr.1.s		I amsammāsambuddho, 	n		m.n.s		the perfectly Enlightened One	sītibhūto-			pp				calmed; tranquillisedasmi 				v		pr.1.s		I amnibbuto. 			pp		m.n.s		extinguished (of fire), cooledI am indeed worthy the alone unsurpassed teacher in world. I am the perfectly Enlightened One calmed and extinguished.    2. Ja 18.3tatheva isayo hiṃsaṃ, saññame brahmacārayo.adhammacārī khattiyo, so saggena virujjhati. tathā-			ind				thus; so; in that way; likewiseeva 				ind				justisayo 			n		m.ac.pl	sages; seerhiṃsaṃ, 			prp		m.n.s		teasing; injuring; hurtingsaññame 			adj		m.ac.pl	 restraint; self-controlbrahmacārayo.		adj		m.ac.pl 	leading a chaste lifeadhammacārī 		adj		m.n.s		unrighteouskhattiyo, 			n		m.n.s		man of the warrior casteso 				pn		m.n.s		hesaggena 			n		m.ins.s	with a place of happiness; heavenvirujjhati. 			v		pr.3.s		opposes; is hostile, is obstructedjust likewise injuring sages, self-controled, leading a chaste life, unrighteous man of the warrior caste opposes with a heaven. 3. Ja 1.8.7pubbe dīpino eḷake khādanti, ahaṃ pana eḷake dīpino anubandhitvā murumurūti khādante addasaṃ.pubbe 			ind				formerly; in the pastdīpino 			n		m.n.pl	tigerseḷake 			n		m.ac.pl	wild goatskhādanti, 			v		pr.3.pl	eat; chewahaṃ 			pn		1.n.s		Ipana 				ind				and; yet; but; and now; moreovereḷake 			n		m.ac.pl	wild goatsdīpino 			n		m.ac.pl	tigersanubandhitvā 		v		abs		having followed, run aftermurumurūti 		v		pr.3.s		making sound “mur-mur”khādante 			pr.p		m.ac.pl	eating; chewingaddasaṃ.			v		aor.1.s	I sawformerly tigers eat wild goats,  but now I saw wild goats having run after tigers and eating them making sound “mur-mur”.4. DN 2.28so parasattānaṃ parapuggalānaṃ cetasā ceto paricca pajānātiso 				pn		m.n.s		he	para-sattānaṃ 		n		m.gen.pl	of living beingspara-puggalānaṃ 	n		m.gen.pl	of another personscetasā 			n		m.ins.s	with mindceto 				n		m.ac.s	mind						paricca 			v		abs		understandingpajānāti			v		pr.3.s		knows clearlyunderstanding mind of another people, other living beings, with (his) mind, he knows clearly5. (SN 4.25)bālā kumudanāḷehi, pabbataṃ abhimatthatha giriṃ nakhena khanatha, ayo dantehi khādatha. bālā 				n		m.n.pl	foolskumudanāḷehi, 		n		m.ins.s	with the stalk of white water-lilypabbataṃ 			n		m.ac.s	mountainabhimatthatha 		v		imp.2.pl 	you should crushe; churn; agitate.giriṃ 				n		m.ac.s	mountainnakhena 			n		m.ins.s	with nail of finger or toe, a clawkhanatha, 			v		imp.2.pl	you should digayo 				n		m.ac.s	irondantehi 			n		m.ins.pl	with teethkhādatha. 			v		imp.2.pl	you should eat; chew; bitefools with the stalk of white water-lily mountain you should crushe, mountain with nail you should dig, iron with teeth you should eat.6. (KN 5.33)pasannanetto sumukho, brahā uju patāpavā.majjhe samaṇasaṅghassa, ādiccova virocasi. pasannanetto 		adj		m.n.s		with bright eyessumukho, 			adj		m.n.s		of good featuresbrahā 			adj		m.n.s		vast; lofty; gigantic; immenseuju 				adj		m.n.s		straight; up-right.patāpavā.			adj		m.n.s		majestic; splendidmajjhe 			ind				in the middlesamaṇasaṅghassa, 	n		m.gen.s	of community of monksādicco’va			n		m.n.s		as sun virocasi. 			v		aor.3.s	shined; was brilliantone who with bright eyes, of good features,  lofty,  up-right, majestic,  in the middle of community of monks, he is like a  sun was brilliant.7.  (DN 1.1)	 tatra ce tumhe assatha kupitā vā anattamanā vā, tumhaṃ yevassa tena antarāyo.tatra 				ind				there; in that placece 				ind				iftumhe 			pn		2.n.pl		youassatha 			v		opt.2.pl	may bekupitā 			pp		m.n.pl	was angry; annoyed; offendedvā 				ind				oranattamanā 		pp		m.n.pl	 displeased; irritatedvā 				ind				ortumhaṃ 			pn		2.dat.pl	youryeva-				ind				even; just; alsoassa 				v		opt.3.s	it would be						tena 				ind				on account of it; because of itantarāyo.			n		m.n.s		obstacle; dangerif you  there may be  angry or irritated, just on account of that it would be obstacle for you.	 8. (KN 9.71)passiya varapuññalakkhaṇaṃ, cakkhu āsi yathā purāṇakanti.passiya 			v		ger		having seenvara-				adj				excellent; noblepuñña-			n				merit; righteousnesslakkhaṇaṃ, 		n		nt.ac.s	a quality, characteristic	cakkhu 			n		nt.n.s		the eyeāsi 				v		aor.3.s	it wasyathā 			ind				as; like;purāṇakaṃ-		adj		nt.n.s		ancient; old; worn out; used; former.ti								“”having seen the one who posses a quality of noble merit, the eye was as former 															9. (SN 4.5) mahābandhanamuttomhi, nihato tvamasi antakā”ti. mahābandhana-		n				strong bondagemutto-			pp		m.n.s		released, set free, freedamhi, 			v		pr.3.s		I amnihato 			adj		m.n.s		"slain"; put down, settled; destroyed; dejected, 								humiliated; humbletvam-				pn		2.n.s		youasi 				v		pr.2.s		you areantakā”ti. 			adj		m.voc.s	being at the end, or making an end, 										Ep. of Death or MāraI am  released from strong bondage, you are destroyed Māra!10. (KN 8.255)brahmajacco pure āsiṃ, udicco ubhato ahu. brahmajacco 		adj		m.n.s		 belonging to the brahman caste.pure 				ind				before; formerly; earlierāsiṃ, 			v		aor.1.s	I wasudicco 			adj		m.n.s		noble; of the northern originubhato 			adj		m.n.s		both, twofold, in both (or two) ways, on both 									sidesahuṃ				v		reflex.aor.1.s	I wasbelonging to the brahman caste  formerly I was, noble on both sides I was.11. (KN 9.71)ahaṃ tava vasānugo siyaṃ, yadi viharāmase kānanantare. ahaṃ 			pn		1.n.s		Itava 				pn		2.dat.s	to youvasānugo 			adj		m.n.s		obedient; dependent; subjectedsiyaṃ, 			v		opt.1.s	I may beyadi 				ind				if; howeverviharāmase 		v.reflex	imp.1.pl	we may livekānanantare. 		n		nt.loc.s	in inside of a forest.I can be  dependent of you, if we may live inside of a forest.12. (DN 16.36)siyā kho pana, bhikkhave, ekabhikkhussāpi kaṅkhā vā vimati vā … magge vā paṭipadāya vāsiyā 				v		opt.3.s	could bekho pana, 			ind				and thenbhikkhave, 			n		voc.pl	o monks!eka-bhikkhussa-api	n		m.dat.s	for just one monkkaṅkhā 			n		f.n.s		doubt; uncertaintyvā 				ind				orvimati 			n		f.n.s		 doubt, perplexityvā 				ind				ormagge			n		m.loc.s	in path, wayvā 				ind				orpaṭipadāya 		n		f.loc.s	in means, method, mode of progressvā 				ind				orand then, o monks, for just one monk could be doubt or perplexity in  path or in mode of progress.13. (KN 9.63) kalyāṇamitte bhajamāno, api bālo paṇḍito assa. kalyāṇamitte 		n		m.ac.pl	good companions; honest friendsbhajamāno, 		pr.p		m.n.s		associating with; keeping companyapi 				ind				evenbālo				n		m.n.s		fool paṇḍito 			n		m.n.s		wise manassa. 			v		opt.3.s	could beassociating with good companions, even fool could become a wise man14. (KN 10.69)											“aruṇakā satta janā, cakkavattī mahabbalā.chattiṃsatimhi āsiṃsu, kappamhi manujādhipā. aruṇakā 			n		m.n.pl	kings Arunakasatta 				adj		m.n.pl	sevenjanā, 				n		m.n.pl	persons; men; the peoplecakkavattī 			n		m.n.pl	universal monarchsmahabbalā.		adj		m.n.pl	having a great power or strong forcechattiṃsatimhi 		adj		m.loc.s	in thirty-sixāsiṃsu, 			v		aor.3.pl	they werekappamhi 			adj		m.loc.s	in aeon	manujādhipā.		n		m.n.pl	lords of men, a kings there were seven people - kings Arunaka, in thirty-six  aeon ago, they were universal monarchs, lords of men. 15. (KN 8.223)  “yo cetā parivajjeti, sappasseva padā siro.somaṃ visattikaṃ loke, sato samativattati. “yo 				pn		m.n.s		that who, whoevercetā 				n		m.abl.s	from mind						parivajjeti, 			v		pr.3.s		shuns; avoids; keeps away fromsappassa-			n		m.gen.s	of snakeva 				ind				as, likepadā 				n		m.abl.s	from footsiro.				n		ac.n.s	headso-				n		m.n.s		heimaṃ				n		f.ac.s		this visattikaṃ 			n		f.ac.s		attachment; cravingloke, 				n		m.loc.s	in worldsato 				adj		m.n.s		mindfulsamativattati. 		v		pr.3.s		overcomes; transcendswhoever keeps away from mind, as head of snake (away) from foot, mindful he this craving for the world overcomes.  16. (DN 2.19)seyyathāpi, mahārāja, puriso ābādhiko assa dukkhito bāḷhagilāno; bhattañcassa nacchādeyya, na cassa kāye balamattā.  seyyathāpi, 		ind				 just asmahārāja, 			n		m.voc.s	o great king!puriso 			n		m.n.s		manābādhiko 			adj		m.n.s		sick; affected with illnessassa				v		opt.3.s	could be			dukkhito			adj		m.n.s		afflicted; grieved; unhappy; suffering; ailing 			bāḷhagilāno		adj		m.n.s		strongly sick 			bhattaṃ-			n		nt.n.s		food c’assa			pn		m.dat.s	and to him							na-cchādeyya		v		opt.3.s	not pleases, to give pleasure 			na				ind				not			c’assa			pn		m.gen.s	and his			kāye				n		m.loc.s	in body			balamattā.			n		f.n.s		right measure of strength 			o great king, suppose a person could be sick, suffering, and strongly sick. Food could not give pleasure to him, there is no right measure of strength in his body.so aparena samayena tamhā ābādhā mucceyya; bhattaṃ cassa chādeyya, siyā cassa kāye balamattā.so				n		m.n.s		he			aparena			adj		m.ins.s	by another 			samayena			n		m.ins.s	by time 			tamhā			n		m.abl.s	from that			ābādhā			n		m.abl.s	from disease; affliction 			mucceyya			v		opt.3.s	could become free 			bhattaṃ + ca + assa					and food for him			chādeyya			v		opt.3.s	could give pleasure; enjoy 			siyā				v		opt.3.s	could be			c’assa			pn		m.gen.s	and his						kāye				n		m.loc.s	in body			balamattā			n		f.n.s		right measure of strength 			by another time he could become free from that disease, and food could give pleasure to him, and there is right measure of strength in his body.		tassa evamassa — ‘ahaṃ kho pubbe ābādhiko ahosiṃ ... na ca me āsi kāye balamattā. tassa 			pn		m.dat.s	to himevaṃ-			ind				thusassa 				v		opt.3.s	it could beahaṃ 			pn		m.n.s		Ikho 				ind				indeedpubbe			ind				formerly ābādhiko 			adj		m.n.s		sick; affected with illnessahosiṃ 			v		aor.1.s	I was...na 				ind				notca 				ind				andme				pn		m.gen.s	my āsi				v		aor.3.s 	it was, there was	 kāye				n		m.loc.s	in body			balamattā			n		f.n.s		right measure of strength thus could be for him - “I indeed formerly was sick … and there was not right measure of strength in my body ”somhi etarahi tamhā ābādhā mutto.so-				ind				and, so, thereforeamhi 				v		pr.1.s		I ametarahi 			ind				now; at presenttamhā			n		m.abl.s	from that			ābādhā			n		m.abl.s	from disease; affliction 	mutto.			pp		m.n.s		freed, releasedand now I am freed from that disease						17. (SN 7.15)tesu assa sagāravo, te c’assu sādhu pūjitā. tesu 				pn		m.loc.pl	in themassa 				v		opt.2.s	you could be, should besagāravo, 			adj		m.n.s		respectfulte 				pn		m.n.pl	theyca				ind				andassu 				v		opt.3.pl	could be, should be			sādhu 			ind				well; thoroughly.pūjitā. 			pp		m.n.pl	honoured; respected; offered something with 									devotionyou should be respectful to them, they  should be  well  respected.18. (KN 8.47)namo te buddha vīratthu, vippamuttosi sabbadhi. namo 			ind				homage, venerationte 				pn		2.dat.s	to youbuddha 			n		m.voc.s	the Buddhavīra-				adj				brave; heroicatthu, 			v		imp.3.s	be it so, may it be				vippamutto-		pp				released, set free, savedasi 				v		pr.2.s		you aresabbadhi. 			ind				everywheremay there be homage to you, the heroic Buddha, everywhere you are released	19. KN-a Dhp, 9.3sā … tumhehi diṭṭhadhammassa bhāginī assan”ti patthanaṃ akāsi.sā				pn		f.n.s		shetumhehi 			pn		2.ins.pl	with you, by youdiṭṭhadhammassa 	n		m.gen.s	this world. (adj.) one who has realised the 									final truth.bhāginī 			adj		m.n.s		sharing in, partaking of (with gen.), endowed 									with; getting, receivingassan”ti 			v		opt.1.s	I would bepatthanaṃ			n		f.ac.s		aiming at; aspiration; desire akāsi.			v		aor.3.s	 did, made, or performedshe made aspiration : “I should be a one who sharing that state of realisation the final truth (attained) by you.”20. Ja 22.545	(KN 15.545)kassapassa vaco sutvā, alāto etadabravi.yathā bhadanto bhaṇati, mayhampetaṃva ruccati. kassapassa 		n		m.gen.s	of the Kassapa Buddhavaco 				n		m.ac.s	speechsutvā, 			v		abs		having heardalāto 				n		m.n.s		Alāta , firebrandetad-				pn		nt.n.s		thisabravi.			v		aor.3.s	 sayed; spokeyathā 			ind				like, asbhadanto 			adj		m.n.s		venerable; reverendbhaṇati, 			v		pr.3.s		speaks; tells; preachesmayhaṃ-			pn		1.dat.s	for me						pi-				ind				onlyetaṃ-			n		nt.n.s		thiseva				ind				just		ruccati. 			v		pr.3.s		finds delight in; likes				Alāta having heard speech of the Kassapa Buddha spoke this: “as venerable speaks, just only this finds delight for me ”    21.  (SN 15.10)so kho panāyaṃ akkhāto, vepullo pabbato mahā. so 				pn		m.n.s		hekho pana- 			ind				and thanayaṃ 			pn		m.ac.s	thisakkhāto, 			pp		m.n.s		announced; told; declaredvepullo 			n		m.n.s		Vepulla, full developmentpabbato 			n		m.n.s		mountainmahā. 			adj		m.n.s		greatmountain Vepulla is said to be the great22.  (SN 21.6) evameva manussesu, daharo cepi paññavā.so hi tattha mahā hoti, neva bālo sarīravāevameva 			ind				similarly, in the same way, so too, just somanussesu, 		n		m.loc.pl	in human beings, mendaharo 			n		m.n.s		small onece’pi 				ind				just ifpaññavā.			adj		m.n.s		wise, intelligent, insightful, percipientso 				pn		m.n.s		hehi 				ind				indeedtattha 			ind				there; in that placemahā 			adj		m.n.s		greathoti, 				v		pr.3.s		he isna-eva 			ind				not evenbālo 				n		m.n.s		foolчё			adj		m.n.s		having a bulky body, having a large bodyin the same way among humans, just if small one wise,  in that regard indeed he is the great, not the not fool, even having a large body.
 Examples 41. (KN 8.263)  sohaṃ ajja kathaṃ vajjaṃ, ahaṃ niccomhi sassato.so-				ind				and, so, thereforeahaṃ 			pn		1.n.s		Iajja 				ind				today, nowkathaṃ 			ind				how? why for what reason?vajjaṃ, 			v		opt.1.s	I would say, may sayahaṃ 			pn		1.n.s		I			nicco-			adj		m.n.s		constant; continuous; permanent.amhi 				v		pr.1.s		I amsassato.			adj		m.n.s		eternal, perpetualtherefore how I woiuld say now : “I am permanent, eternal.” ?2. (KN 9.69)ehi sārathi gacchāhi, rathaṃ niyyādayāhimaṃ.ārogyaṃ brāhmaṇiṃ vajjā, ‘pabbajito’dāni brāhmaṇo. 	ehi 				v		imp.2.s	you come, come heresārathi 			n		m.voc.s	a charioteer; a coachman; a drivergacchāhi, 			v		imp.2.s	you gorathaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	carriage; chariot.niyyādayāhi-		v		imp.2.s	you give into charge; give over; hand over; 								assign; dedicateimaṃ.			pn		m.ac.s	thisārogyaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	healthbrāhmaṇiṃ			n		f.ac.s		brahman’s woman					vajja, 			v		opt.2.s	you should say‘pabbajito-			n		m.n.s		monk’dāni				ind				now brāhmaṇo.			n		m.n.s		a man of the Brahman casteCome here charioteer, go and hand over this carriage, and you should say to Brahman’s woman about health, and that Brahman is now a monk.3. KN 9.68(a)		vandanaṃ dāni vajjāsi, lokanāthaṃ anuttaraṃvandanaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	 salutation; homagedāni 				ind				now vajjāsi, 			v		opt.2.s	you would saylokanāthaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	the lord of the worldanuttaraṃ			adj		m.ac.s	incomparable; unsurpassednow you should say salutation to the incomparable lord of the world(b)		vandanaṃ dāni te vajjaṃ, lokanāthaṃ anuttaraṃ. te				pn		m.ac.s	thatvajjaṃ			v		opt.1.s	I would saynow I should say salutation to that incomparable lord of the world4. Vin 4.1.14na tāhaṃ sakkomi vitthārena dhammaṃ desetuṃ, api ca te saṃkhittena atthaṃ vakkhāmī”ti.na 				ind				notte-				pn		m.dat.s	to youahaṃ 			pn		1.n.s		Isakkomi 			v		pr.1.s		I am ablevitthārena 			n		m.ins.s	with explanation; by detaildhammaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	Teachingdesetuṃ, 			v		inf		to preachapi 				ind				and; even; and then.ca 				ind				and, ifte 				pn		m.dat.s	to yousaṃkhittena 		ind				in briefatthaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	meaningvakkhāmī”ti.		v		fut.1.s	I will sayI am not able to preach Teaching in detail to you, but I will tall meaning in brief to you6. Vin 4.1.1tena samayena buddho bhagavā uruvelāyaṃ viharati najjā nerañjarāya tīre bodhirukkhamūletena 				pn		m.ins.s	by thatsamayena 			n		m.ins.s	by time, occasion 	buddho 			n		m.n.s		The Buddhabhagavā 			n		m.n.s		The Fortunate Oneuruvelāyaṃ 		n		f.loc.s	in Uruvela viharati 			v		pr.3.s		stays, livesnajjā 				n		f.gen.s	of rivernerañjarāya 		n		f.gen.s	of Nerañjarā: name of a river.tīre 				n		nt.loc.s	in the shore; riverbankbodhi-			n				 the tree of wisdom, the sacred Bo tree, 								the fig tree rukkhamūle		n		nt.loc.s	in the foot of a tree.on that time the Buddha, The Fortunate One, stays in Uruvela, in the riverbank of the river Nerañjarā, in the foot of the Bodhi tree.7. (AN 4.51)  najjo yathā nara-gaṇa-saṅgha-sevitāputhū savantī upayanti sāgaraṃ. najjo 				n		f.n.pl		riversyathā 			ind				just as.nara-				n				man; a human being.gaṇa-				n				 crowdsaṅgha-			n				multitude, assemblagesevitā			pp		f.n.pl		served; associated with; made use of; 									practised, frequentedputhu 			ind				separately, individuallysavantī 			n		f.n.pl		riversupayanti 			v		pr.3.pl	approachesāgaraṃ. 			n		m.ac.s	the sea; oceanjust as rivers served to multitude crowd of people, rivers separately approache to the ocean.8. (SN 11.15)  ārāmacetyā vanacetyā, pokkharañño sunimmitā.manussarāmaṇeyyassa, kalaṃ nāgghanti soḷasiṃ. ārāmacetyā 		n		m.n.pl	sacred gardens; parksvanacetyā, 			n		m.n.pl	sacred forestspokkharañño		n		f.n.pl		pondssunimmitā.			pp		f.n.pl		well created; fashioned; built; produced.manussa-							man, humanrāmaṇeyyassa, 		adj		m.gen.s	of agreeable, good naturedkalaṃ 			n				a small fraction of a whole, generally the 								16th part; 1/16nāgghanti 			v		pr.3.pl	are not worth; deservessoḷasiṃ. 			n		f		sixteenthsacred parks, sacred forests,  well created ponds, they are not worth 1/16 of delightful human.gāme vā yadi vāraññe, ninne vā yadi vā thale.yattha arahanto viharanti, taṃ bhūmirāmaṇeyyakan”ti. gāme 				n		m.loc.s	in village, hamlet, collection of 										housesvā 					ind				oryadi 					ind				if, even, even if, perhapsvā- 					ind				oraraññe, 				n		nt.loc.s	in forest, wood, wildsninne 				n		nt.loc.s	in lowlands, valevā 					ind				or yadi 					ind				if, even, even if, perhaps vā 					ind				or thale.					n		nt.loc.s	in highlands, high ground, plateauyattha 				ind				wherever, wherearahanto 				n		m.n.pl	enlightened beings, lit. worthy onesviharanti, 				v		pr.3.pl	they live, stay, remain, continuetaṃ 					pn		f.ac.s		thatbhūmi-				n				land, region, arearāmaṇeyyakan”ti. 		adj		f.ac.s		delightful, pleasingin village or even in forest, in lowlands or even in highlands,  wherever enlightened beings stay, that area is delightful.9. 6114 Jātaka Pāḷi-2ekapaṇṇo ayaṃ rukkho, na bhūmyā caturaṅgulo;ekapaṇṇo 			adj		m.n.s		having only a single leaf.ayaṃ 			pn		m.n.s		thisrukkho, 			n		m.n.s		a treena 				ind				notbhūmyā 			n		f.abl.s	from earthcaturaṅgulo;		adj		m.n.s		measuring four inchesthis tree having only a single leaf do not have four inches from the earth. 10. (KN 8.242)tato ratyā vivasāne, sūriyassuggamanaṃ pati.indo brahmā ca āgantvā, maṃ namassiṃsu pañjalī. tato				ind				from there; from that; thence; therefore ratyā 				n		f.loc.s	in night	vivasāne, 			n		nt.loc.s	in the the endsūriyass-uggamanaṃ 	n		nt.ac.s	rising; rise of the sunpati.				indindo 				n		m.n.s		Indrabrahmā 			n		m.n.s		Brahmaca 				ind				andāgantvā, 			v		abs		having came.maṃ 				pn		1.ac.s	menamassiṃsu		v		aor.3.pl	payed honour; venerated. pañjalī. 			adj				making token of reverencetherefore in the the end of night , in the rise of the sun, Indra and Brahma having came, payed honour to me making token of reverence  .11.  (DN 16.38)atha kho kosinārakā mallā āyasmantaṃ anuruddhaṃ etadavocuṃatha kho 			ind				and thenkosinārakā 		adj		m.n.pl	belonging to Kusinārāmallā 			n		m.n.pl	men of the Malla clan.āyasmantaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	venerableanuruddhaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	Anutuddhaetad-				pn		nt.n.s		thisavocuṃ			v		aor.3.pl	they saidand then men of the Malla clan, belonging to Kusinārā, said this to the venerable Anutuddha.12. (KN 8.14)upajjhāyo maṃ avacāsi, ito gacchāma sīvaka.upajjhāyo 			n		m.n.s		spiritual teacher or preceptormaṃ 				pn		1.ac.s	meavacāsi, 			v		aor.3.s	he saidito 				ind				from here; from now; hencegacchāma 			v		pr.1.pl	we go; move; walksīvaka.			n		m.voc.s	o Sīvakapreceptor said to me : “Sīvaka, we go from here”.13.  (SN 1.47)  papañ’ca udapānañ’ca, ye dadanti upassayaṃ.“tesaṃ divā ca ratto ca, sadā puññaṃ pavaḍḍhati.papañ’ca 			n		f.ac.s		a place for supplying water andudapānañ’ca, 		n		m.ac.s	a well, a cistern andye 				pn		m.n.pl	they who,  those whodadanti 			v		pr.3.pl	they give; offerupassayaṃ.		n		m.ac.s	abode; home“tesaṃ 			pn		m.dat.pl	to themdivā 				ind				by dayca 				ind				andratto 				ind				by nightca, 				ind				andsadā 				ind				 ever; alwayspuññaṃ 			n		nt.n.s		merit; righteousnesspavaḍḍhati.		v		pr.3.s		 grows; increasesplace to drink and a well, those who offer a abode, for them by day and by night, always merit increases.dhammaṭṭhā sīlasampannā, te janā saggagāmino”ti.dhammaṭṭhā 		adj		m.n.pl	righteous, just, moral, virtuous, 										lit. standing on Dhammasīlasampannā, 		adj		m.n.pl	accomplished in virtue, of excellent 									moralityte				pn		m.n.pl	they, thosejanā 				n		m.n.pl	men, peoplesaggagāmino”ti.		adj		m.n.pl	going to heavenrighteous,  accomplished in virtue, those people are going to heaven.14.  (KN 15.547)“najjāyo supatitthāyo, soṇṇavālukasanthatā.acchā savanti ambūni, macchagumbanisevitā. “najjāyo 			n		f.nom.pl	riverssu-patitthāyo, 		adj		f.nom.pl	with beautiful banks, having safe landing 								or bathing places	soṇṇavāluka-		n		f		golden sand. santhatā.			pp		f.nom.pl	covered with; spread, strewnacchā 			adj		f.n.s		clear; puresavanti 			v		pr.3.pl	they flowambūni, 			n		nt.n.pl	watermacchagumba-		n		m		shawl of fishnisevitā. 			pp		f.n.s		frequented, practised, enjoyed, indulged inrivers  with beautiful banks covered with pure golden sand,  water flow, shawl of fish enjoyed.  15. (DN 10.1)evañca vadehi — ‘sādhu kira bhavaṃ ānando yena subhassa māṇavassa todeyyaputtassa nivesanaṃ tenupasaṅkamatu evañ’ca 			ind				thus; in this way andvadehi 			v		imp.2.s	you say, speaksādhu 			ind				it is goodkira 				ind				 really, truly, surely.bhavaṃ 			n		m.n.s		Sir, Lord, venerableānando 			n		m.n.s		Ānandayena 				ind				wheresubhassa 			adj		m.gen.s	of Subha, shining, bright, beautifulmāṇavassa 		n		m.gen.s	of young man, young brahmantodeyyaputtassa 		n		m.gen.s	of sun of Todeyyanivesanaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	abode; houseten-				ind				thereupasaṅkamatu 		v		imp.3.s	should aproache	, may come toin this way you shall speak: “It is really good that Venerable Ānanda may aproache to the house of young brahman Subha sun of Todeyya.”16. (DN 10.1)atha kho so māṇavako … upasaṅkamitvā subhaṃ māṇavaṃ todeyyaputtaṃ etadavoca, “avocumhā kho mayaṃ bhoto vacanena taṃ bhavantaṃ ānandaṃatha kho 			ind				and thenso 				pn		m.n.s		he, thatmāṇavako			n		m.n.s		young man, young brahmanupasaṅkamitvā 		v		abs		having approached; drawing nearsubhaṃ 			adj		m.ac.s	Subha, shining, bright, beautifulmāṇavaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	young man, young brahmantodeyyaputtaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	sun of Todeyyaetadavoca			v		aor.3.s	said thisavocumhā 			v		aor.1.pl	we saidkho 				ind				indeedmayaṃ 			pn		1.n.pl		webhoto 			n		m.dat.s	to Sir, Lord, venerablevacanena 			n		nt.ins.s	with utterance; word; sayingtaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	that, hebhavantaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	Sir, Lord, venerableānandaṃ			n		m.ac.s	Ānandaand then that young brahman … having approached young brahman Subha, sun of Todeyya, said this: indeed we said to Sir with utterance of venerable Ānanda17.  (KN 8.172)  yañhi kayirā tañhi vade, yaṃ na kayirā na taṃ vade.yaṃ-				pn		m.ac.s	whateverhi 				ind				indeedkayirā 			v		opt.3.s	would do , can maketaṃ-				pn		m.ac.s	thathi 				ind				indeedvade, 			v		opt.3.s	could speak, shoul sayyaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	whatever	na 				ind				notkayirā 			v		opt.3.s	would do , can makena  				ind				nottaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	thatvade. 			v		opt.3.s	could speak, shoul sayindeed whatever he can do, that indeed he shoul speak, whatever he can’t do , that he should not speak.18. Vin pārājikapāḷi 2.12mā maṃ āyasmanto kiñci avacuttha kalyāṇaṃ vā pāpakaṃ vā, ahaṃpāyasmante na kiñci vakkhāmi kalyāṇaṃ vā pāpakaṃ vāmā 				ind				do notmaṃ 				pn		1.ac.s	meāyasmanto 		n		m.n.s		venerablekiñci 				ind				somethingavacuttha 			v		refl.imperf.3.s		was sayingkalyāṇaṃ 			adj		m.ac.s	good, beneficialvā 				ind				orpāpakaṃ 			adj		m.ac.s	bad, harmfulvā, 				ind				orahaṃ-			pn		1.n.s		Iāyasmante 		n		m.ac.pl	venerablesna 				ind				notkiñci 				ind				somethingvakkhāmi 			v		fut.1.s	I will saykalyāṇaṃ 			adj		m.ac.s	good, beneficialvā 				ind				orpāpakaṃ 			adj		m.ac.s	bad, harmfulvā				ind				ordo not say to me venerable anything good or bad, I will not say to venerables anything good or bad. 19. Vin pārājikapāḷi 2.12 ‘māyasmā attānaṃ avacanīyaṃ akāsi,  … , āyasmāpi bhikkhū vadetu sahadhammena, bhikkhūpi āyasmantaṃ vakkhanti sahadhammena.mā-				ind				do notāyasmā 			n		m.voc.s	venerableattānaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	oneselfavacanīyaṃ		adj, ptp	m.ac.s	not to be admonished akāsi				v		aor.3.s	did, made, or performed.āyasmā-			n		m.n.s		venerablepi 				ind				justbhikkhū 			n		m.ac.pl	monksvadetu 			v		imp.3.s	may saysahadhammena, 	ind				rightly, justly, reasonably, lit. with reason	bhikkhū-			n		m.n.pl	monkspi 				ind				justāyasmantaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	venerablevakkhanti 			v		fut.3.pl	they will saysahadhammena.		n		m.ins.s	with reason, in accordance with Dhammavenerable, do not make oneself not to be admonished, … , and venerable may speak to monks in accordance with Dhamma, and monks will speak with venerable in accordance with Dhamma
 Examples 51. (jā. 1.1.78)ubho khañjā ubho kuṇī, ubho visamacakkhukā.ubhinnaṃ piḷakā jātā, nāhaṃ passāmi illisan”ti. ubho 				pn		m.n.pl	bothkhañjā 			adj		m.n.pl	lame ubho 				pn		m.n.pl	bothkuṇī, 				adj		m.n.pl	cripple, deformed, paralysed ubho 				pn		m.n.pl	bothvisama-			adj				uneven; unequal; disharmonious.cakkhukā.			adj		m.n.pl	having eyesubhinnaṃ 			pn		m.gen.pl	of bothpiḷakā 			n		f.n.pl		a boil; a blister, pustule, pimplejātā, 				pp		f.n.pl		born; arisen; becomena-ahaṃ 			pn		1.n.s		I am notpassāmi 			v		pr.1.s		I see; find; understandillisan”ti. 			n		m.ac.s	IllisaBoth are lame, both are cripple, both have unequal eyes,There are arisen blisters of both. I do not see Illisa.2. (KN 5.24)vāriṃ yathā ghammani ghammatatto, vācābhikaṅkhāmi sutaṃ pavassavāriṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	wateryathā 			ind				as, likeghammani 			n		m.loc.s	in heat; in the hot seasonghamma-			n				heat; hot seasontatto, 				pp		m.n.s		heated, burnedvāca-				n				word; speech; sayingabhikaṅkhāmi 		v		pr.1.s		I long or wish forsutaṃ 			pp		f.ac.s		what is heard, soundpavassa			v		imp.2.s	you should rainlike a water in the hot season by sombody who burned by heat, I wish the word: you ‘should rain the sound’.3. Vin 4, 1.13etāhaṃ, bhante, veḷuvanaṃ uyyānaṃ buddhappamukhassa bhikkhusaṅghassa dammī”ti.eta-				pn				thisahaṃ, 			pn		1.n.s		Ibhante, 			n		m.voc.s	Venerable, Reverend Sir; O lordveḷuvanaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	Veluvanauyyānaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	 park; pleasure grovebuddha-			n				the Buddhapamukhassa 		n		m.dat.s	to forest; chiefbhikkhusaṅghassa 	n		m.dat.s	to congregation of monksdammī”ti.			v		pr.1.s		I giveVenerable, I give pleasure grove Veluvana to congregation of monks, with Buddha as chief.4. Vin 4, 6.117“dehi, je ambapāli, amhākaṃ etaṃ bhattaṃ satasahassenā”ti. “sacepi me, ayyaputtā, vesāliṃ sāhāraṃ dajjeyyātha, neva dajjāhaṃ taṃ bhattan”ti.dehi, 				v		imp.2.s	giveje 				ind		excl		oh! ah! now then!ambapāli, 			n		f.voc.s	Ambapālīamhākaṃ 			pn		1.dat.pl	to usetaṃ 				pn		nt.ac.s	thisbhattaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	mealsatasahassenā”ti. 	n		nt.ins.s	with  hundred thousand.sace’pi 			ind				even ifme, 				pn		1.dat.s	to meayyaputtā, 			n		m.voc.pl	master's sonsvesāliṃ 			n		m.ac.s	Vesālisāhāraṃ 			adj		m.ac.s	 with the revenuesdajjeyyātha, 		v		opt.2.pl	you could givena-eva 			ind				not evendajjāmi-			v		opt.1.s	I could giveahaṃ 			pn		1.n.s		I		taṃ 				pn		nt.ac.s	thisbhattaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	mealah! Ambapālī! give this meal to us by hundred thousand! o master's sons, even if you could give Vesāli with the revenues, even I could not give this meal.  5.  (SN 1.6) “kati jāgarataṃ suttā, kati suttesu jāgarā.katīhi rajamādeti, katīhi parisujjhatī”ti. kati 				pn		m.n.pl	how manyjāgarataṃ 			pr.p		m.gen.pl	of (among) awaking		suttā, 			pp		m.n.pl	asleepkati 				pn		m.n.pl	how manysuttesu 			pp		m.loc.pl	among asleepjāgarā.			adj		m.n.pl	 awake; vigilant; watchful.katīhi 			pn		m.ins.pl	with/by how manyrajaṃ-			n				dust; dirt; impurityādeti, 			v		pr.3.s		 takes, receives, getskatīhi 			pn		m.ins.pl	with/by how manyparisujjhatī”ti. 		v		pr.3.s		becomes clean; purifieshow many asleep among awaking ? how many watchful among asleep? by how many (ways) one receives impurity? by how many (ways) one becomes purifies ?pañca jāgarataṃ suttā, pañca suttesu jāgarā.pañcabhi rajamādeti, pañcabhi parisujjhatī”ti. pañca 			adj		-.n.pl		five (5)jāgarataṃ 			pr.p		m.gen.pl	of (among) awaking		suttā, 			pp		m.n.pl	asleeppañca 			adj		-.n.pl		five (5)suttesu 			pp		m.loc.pl	among asleepjāgarā.			adj		m.n.pl	 awake; vigilant; watchful.pañcabhi 			adj		-.ins.pl	by five (5) rajaṃ-			n				dust; dirt; impurityādeti, 			v		pr.3.s		 takes, receives, getspañcabhi 			adj		-.ins.pl	by five (5) rajaṃ-			n				dust; dirt; impurityādeti, 			v		pr.3.s		 takes, receives, getsfive asleep among awaking. five watchful among asleep. by five one receives impurity. by five one becomes purifies. (Spk: 5 balas & 5 hindrances)6.  (KN 10.523)disvāna taṃ devadevaṃ, tiṇamuṭṭhimadāsahaṃ.disvāna 			v		abs		having seen; having found; 											having understood.taṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	thatdevadevaṃ,		n		m.ac.s	the god of godstiṇamuṭṭhiṃ-		n				handfuladāsiṃ-			v		aor.3.s	I gaveahaṃ.			pn		1.n.s		Ihaving seen him, the god of gods, I gave handful.7. (KN 10.469)“ekanavutito kappe, yaṃ phalaṃ adadiṃ tadā.duggatiṃ nābhijānāmi, phaladānassidaṃ phalaṃ. ekanavutito 		adj		m.abl.s	from ninety onekappe, 			n		m.loc.s	in the aeon					yaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	whateverphalaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	fruitadadiṃ 			v		aor.1.s	I gavetadā.				ind				then, at that time, thereforeduggatiṃ 			n		f.ac.s		a realm of miserable existencen’ābhijānāmi,		v 		pr.1.s		I not know fully or by experience; 										I am not awarephala-			n				fruitdānass-			n		gen		of giving, charityidaṃ 				pn		nt.n.s		thisphalaṃ. 			n		nt.n.s		resultninety one aeon (ago), that which fruit I gave at that time, therefore I not experiance a realm of miserable existence, this is result of giving fruit.	8. Vin-a 1atha brāhmaṇo “yaṃnūnāhaṃ yaṃ me tīhi māsehi dātabbaṃ siyā, taṃ sabbaṃ ekadivaseneva dadeyyan”ti cintetvā adhivāsetu me bhavaṃ gotamotiādimāha.atha 				ind				 then; and also. brāhmaṇo 			n		m.n.s		brahmanyaṃnūnāhaṃ		ind				what if I yaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	whatever, that whatme				pn		m.gen.s	my tīhi 				adj		m.ins.pl	by threemāsehi 			n		m.ins.pl	by monthsdātabbaṃ 			pt.p		m.ac.s	should be givensiyā, 				v		opt.3.s	could betaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	thatsabbaṃ 			adj		m.ac.s	alleka-divasena-		n		m.ins.s	with one dayeva 				ind				just, even, onlydadeyyaṃ			v		opt.refl.1.s		I could givecintetvā 			v		abs		 having thoughtadhivāsetu 		v		imp.3.s	he should endure; wait for, agreeme 				pn		1.dat.s	to mebhavaṃ 			adj				Venerable, Sirgotamo-			n				Gotamati-				ind				“”ādim-				n		m.ac.s	first; beginning withāha.				v		perf.3.s	he has saidthen brahman having thought: “what if I whatever by three months can be given, all that I should give ” “Sir Gotama should agree” first he said.9. Vin-a 1so gehaṃ gantvā pucchi — “tassa pabbajitassa kiñci adatthā”ti? “na kiñci adamhā”ti.so 				pn		m.n.s		he, thatgehaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	house; dwelling placegantvā 			v		abs		 having gonepucchi			v		aor.3.s	asked; questionedtassa  			n		m.dat.s	to thatpabbajitassa 		n		m.dat.s	to monkkiñci 				ind				somethingadatthā”ti			v		aor.2.pl	you gavena 				ind				notkiñci 				ind				something, anythingadamhā”ti.			v		aor.1.pl	we gave having gone to the house, he asked: “Did you gave something to that monk?”; “We did not gave anything.”10.  (KN 9.54)“yattakaṃ tulitā esā, tuyhaṃ dhītā anopamā.tato aṭṭhaguṇaṃ dassaṃ, hiraññaṃ ratanāni ca. yattakaṃ 			adj		m.ac.s	however muchtulitā 				pp		f.n.s		weighed; examined; comparedesā, 				pn		f.n.s		this, shetuyhaṃ 			pn		2.gen.s	yourdhītā 				n		f.n.s		daughteranopamā.			n		f.n.s		Peerlesstato 				ind				 from there; from that; thence; therefore; 								thereupon.aṭṭhaguṇaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	eight times; eight times as muchdassaṃ,			v		fut.1.s	I will givehiraññaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	unwrought gold.ratanāni 			n		nt.ac.pl	gems, jewelsca. 				ind				andhowever much she weighed, your daughter Peerless, eight times like this I will give, unwrought gold and gems.  	 	11. (KN 10.52)dibbagandhaṃ pavāyantaṃ, yo me pupphagghiyaṃ adā. dibba-			adj				divine; celestialgandhaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	odour; smell; scentpavāyantaṃ, 		pr.p		m.ac.s	blowing forth; diffusingyo 				pn		m.n.s		whatever, thatme 				pn		1.dat.s	to mepuppha-			n				floweragghiyaṃ 			adj				valuable, precious, worthadā.				v		imperf.3.s	he gavevaluable flower, diffusing divine odour, he gave to me12.a  (KN 5.35)  kassako kammunā hoti, sippiko hoti kammunā. kassako 			n		m.n.s		cultivator, peasant, farmerkammunā			n		m.ins.s	by deed, action  hoti, 				v		pr.3.s		he issippiko 			n		m.n.s		craftsmanhoti 				v		pr.3.s		he is			kammunā.			n		m.ins.s	by deed, action  by action he is a farmer, by action he is a craftsman12.b (KN 5.7)    vasalasuttaṃna jaccā vasalo hoti, na jaccā hoti brāhmaṇo.na 				ind				notjaccā 			n		f.ins.s	by birth vasalo 			n		m.n.s		outcasthoti, 				v		pr.3.s		he is	na 				ind				notjaccā 			n		f.ins.s	by birthhoti 				v		pr.3.s		he is	brāhmaṇo.			n		m.n.s		brahmannot by birth he is a outcast, not by birth he is a brahman.kammunā vasalo hoti, kammunā hoti brāhmaṇo. kammunā 			n		m.ins.s	by deed, action  vasalo 			n		m.n.s		outcasthoti, 				v		pr.3.s		he is	kammunā 			n		m.ins.s	by deed, action  hoti 				v		pr.3.s		he is	brāhmaṇo.			n		m.n.s		brahmanby action he is a outcast, by action he is a brahman.13. Vin 4, 8.203“vejjo evamāha — ‘mā kira, ayye, pure kiñci adāsi. yadā arogā ahosi tadā yaṃ iccheyyāsi taṃ dajjeyyāsī’”ti.vejjo 				n		m.n.s		doctorevaṃ-			pn		m.ac.s	thisāha 				v		perf.3.s	saidmā 				ind				do notkira, 				ind				really; trulyayye, 			n				gentleman; lord; master.pure 				ind				before; formerly; earlier.kiñci 				ind				somethingadāsi. 			v		aor.2.s	you gaveyadā 				ind				whenever; when.arogā 			adj				healthy; void of sicknessahosi 			v		aor.3.s	he wastadā 				ind				then, as that time yaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	whatevericcheyyāsi 			v		opt.2.s	you could wish, desiretaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	thatdajjeyyāsī’”ti.		v		opt.2.s	you could givedoctor said this: “o master, really do not give something earlier. when he was healthy, then whatever you could wish, that you could give”14. (KN 14.293) parisussati khippamidaṃ kaḷevaraṃ, pupphaṃ yathā paṃsuni ātape kataṃ. parisussati 			v		pr.3.s		dries up; washes awaykhippaṃ-			ind				quicklyidaṃ 				pn		nt.n.s		thiskaḷevaraṃ, 		n		nt.n.s		bodypupphaṃ 			n		nt.n.s		floweryathā 			ind				 as; likepaṃsuni 			n		m.loc.s	in soil; dust. 						ātape 			n		m.loc.s	in heat of the sunkataṃ.			pp		nt.n.s		done, madethis body dries up quickly, like flower made in dust and heat of the sun.  		15. (KN 8.225)“buddho ce me varaṃ dajjā, so ca labbhetha me varo. “buddho 			n		m.n.s		the Buddhace 				ind				and, butme 				pn		1.dat.s	to mevaraṃ 			n		m.ac.s	boon; favourdajjā, 			v		opt.3.s	could giveso 				pn		m.n.s		he, thatca 				ind				andlabbhetha 			v.pass	opt.refl.3.s	it could be obtainedme 				pn		1.dat.s	to mevaro.				n		m.n.s		boon; favourand the Buddha could give boon to me, if that  boon could be obtained by me.16.  (SN 6.4)yaṃ tvaṃ apāyesi bahū manusse,pipāsite ghammani samparete.taṃ te purāṇaṃ vatasīlavattaṃ,suttappabuddhova anussarāmi. yaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	whatevertvaṃ 				pn		2.n.s		youapāyesi 			v		aor.2.s	you made drunk	bahū 				adj		m.ac.pl	manymanusse,			n		m.ac.pl	peoplepipāsite 			pp		m.ac.pl	thirstyghammani 			n		m.loc.s	in the hot seasonsamparete.			pp		m.ac.pl	surrounded, beset with, tormented bytaṃ 				pn		nt.n.s		thatte 				pn		1.gen.s	your	purāṇaṃ 			adj		nt.n.s		ancient; old; worn out; used; former.vata-				n				religious duty or observancesīlavattaṃ,			n		nt.n.s		 virtue and good actionsuttappabuddho’va 	adj		m.n.s		as awaken from sleep.anussarāmi. 		v		pr.1.s		I remember“You gave drink to many peopleWho were thirsty, afflicted by heat:That was your ancient practice of vow and virtue,Which I recollect as if just waking up. (BB)17. KN-a Dhp, 5.11sopi tesaṃ gatabhāvaṃ ñatvā vaccakuṭiyā padaraṃ vivaritvā oruyha ubhohi hatthehi ālopaṃ ālopaṃ katvā gūthaṃ khādi;so-				pn		m.n.s		that, heapi 				ind				also, but tesaṃ 			pn		gen.pl	of thosegatabhāvaṃ		n		m.ac.s	the fact of having gone ñatvā 			v		abs		having known; having found out.vaccakuṭiyā 		n		f.gen.s	of privy; lavatorypadaraṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	boardvivaritvā 			v		abs		having opened; having uncovered.oruyha 			v		abs		having descended; having come down.ubhohi 			pn		m.ins.pl	with bothhatthehi 			n		m.ins.pl	with handsālopaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	a morsel; a bit; lumpālopaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	a morsel; a bit; lump		katvā 			v		abs		 having done or made.gūthaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	faeces; dung; excrement.khādi;			v		aor.3.s	 ate; chewedalso he having known the fact of having gone of those, having opened board of lavatory, having come down, with both hands lump by lump having made he chewed excrement  18. (SN 3.17)  appamādaṃ pasaṃsanti, puññakiriyāsu paṇḍitā.appamādaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	care, carefulness, caution, vigilance, 									diligence, conscientiousness, 										heedfulness, lit. not heedlesspasaṃsanti, 		v		pr.3.pl	praise, approve (of), commendpuññakiriyāsu 		n		f.loc.pl	in making merit, meritorious deedspaṇḍitā.			n		m.n.pl	sages, intelligent people, wise menthe wise people praise heedfulness in meritorious deedsappamatto ubho atthe, adhiggaṇhāti paṇḍito. 	appamatto 			pp		m.n.s		 vigilant; careful; alertubho 				pn		m.ac.pl	bothatthe, 			n		m.ac.pl	good, blessings, benefitsadhiggaṇhāti 		v		pr.3.s		receives, owns, possesspaṇḍito.			n		m.n.s		wise man, sagevigilant wise man receives both benefits19. KN-a Ja 1,  [515] 5.tamaddasa mahābrahmā, nisinnaṃ samhi vesmani. taṃ-				pn		m.ac.s	that, himaddasa 			v		aor.3.s	he sawmahābrahmā, 		n		m.n.s		Great Brahmanisinnaṃ 			pp		m.ac.s	sitting down, seated samhi 			adj		m.loc.s	in one’s ownvesmani. 			n		loc.s		in mansionthe Great Brahma saw him, seated in his own mansion20.  (SN 7.9)  māno hi te brāhmaṇa khāribhāro,kodho dhumo bhasmani mosavajjaṃ. māno 			n		m.n.s		pride; conceithi 				ind				indeedte 				pn		2.gen.s	yourbrāhmaṇa 			n		m.voc.s	Brahmankhāri-				n				a basket bhāro,			n		m.n.s		weight, burdenkodho 			n		m.n.s		angerdhūmo 			n		m.n.s		smoke	bhasmani 			n		nt.loc.s	in ashes 					mosavajjaṃ. 		n		nt.n.s		untrutho Brahman, indeed your pride is a burden basket, anger is a smoke , untruth is an ashes 	Conceit, O brahmin, is your shoulder-load,Anger the smoke, false speech the ashes; BB												jivhā sujā hadayaṃ jotiṭhānaṃ,attā sudanto purisassa joti.jivhā 				n		f.n.s		tonguesujā 				n		f.n.s		the sacrificial ladle.hadayaṃ 			n		nt.n.s		heartjoti-				n		f		light, fireṭhānaṃ,			n		nt.n.s		placeattā 				n		m.n.s		self, oneself	sudanto 			adj		m.n.s		well tamed, well trained, well controlledpurisassa 			n		m.gen.s	of man	joti.				n		f		light, fireThe tongue is the ladle, the heart the altar,A well-tamed self is the light of a man.BB: Kharibhara, "shoulder-load," is a carrying device commonly used in South Asia, consisting of two trays at each end of a pole borne across the shoulder. Spk: "Conceit, O brahmin, is your shoulder-load: When a shoulder-load is being carried, with each step the weight of the load brings the trays into contact with the ground; similarly, though conceit props one up on account of birth, clan, family, etc., it causes envy to arise and thereby pulls one down to the four realms of misery. Anger the smoke: because the fire of knowledge does not shine when defiled by the smoke of anger. False speech the ashes : because the fire of knowledge does not burn when covered by false speech. The tongue is the ladle: my the Buddha’s tongue is a ladle offering the Dhamma sacrifice. The heart the altar: the hearts of beings are the altar, the fireplace, for my offering of the Dhamma sacrifice. The self atta is the mind."
 Examples 61.  (KN 9.46)“divāvihārā nikkhamma, gijjhakūṭamhi pabbate.addasaṃ virajaṃ buddhaṃ, bhikkhusaṅghapurakkhataṃ. divāvihārā 			n		m.abl.s	from rest during the heat. nikkhamma, 		v		abs		having gone out; having gone forth from; 								having left the household lifegijjhakūṭamhi 		n		m.loc.s	in the Gijjhakūṭa: the Vulture's peak near 								Rājagaha. pabbate.			n		m.loc.s	in a mountain; rockaddasaṃ 			v		aor.1.s	I sawvirajaṃ 			adj		m.ac.s	 stainless; free from defilementbuddhaṃ, 			n		m.ac.s	the Enlightened Onebhikkhusaṅgha-		n		m		congregation of monkspurakkhataṃ. 		pp		m.ac.s	put in front; honoured; esteemed.having gone out from rest during the heat in the mountain Gijjhakūṭa, I saw the stainless Enlightened One,  honoured by congregation of monks.2.  (KN 9.69)addasa brāhmaṇo buddhaṃ, vippamuttaṃ nirūpadhiṃ. addasa 			v		aor.3.s	he saw brāhmaṇo 			n		m.n.s		a man of the Brahman castebuddhaṃ, 			n		m.ac.s	the Enlightened Onevippamuttaṃ 		pp		m.ac.s	released, set free, savednirūpadhiṃ. 		adj		m.ac.s	free from attachment, free from graspingBrahman saw the Enlightened One, released, free from attachment. 3. (KN 9.68)tato ca kāḷo pakkāmi, nadiṃ nerañjaraṃ pati.so addasāsi sambuddhaṃ, desentaṃ amataṃ padaṃ. tato 				ind				from there; from that; thence; thereforeca 				ind				andkāḷo 				adj		m.n.s		black; darkpakkāmi			v		aor.3.s	he went forthnadiṃ 			n		f.ac.s		rivernerañjaraṃ 		n		f.ac.s		Nerañjarā: name of a river.pati.				ind				against, opposite, in opposition (to)so 				pn		m.n.s		he, thataddasāsi 			v		aor.3.s	he sawsambuddhaṃ		n		m.ac.s	the Enlightened Onedesentaṃ 			pr.p		m.ac.s	pointing out; preaching; expoundingamataṃ 			adj		m.ac.s	deathlesspadaṃ. 			n		m.ac.s	way, pathand from there the black went forth opposite of the river Nerañjarā,  he saw the Enlightened One preaching the path to the deathless4.  (KN 11.17)nadato parisāyaṃ te, vāditabbapahārino.ye te dakkhanti vadanaṃ, dhaññā te narapuṅgava. nadato 			pr.p		m.gen.s	when roaring, crying, making a noiseparisāyaṃ 			n		f.loc.s	among the company; assemblyte, 				pn		2.gen.s	when youvādī-				n				one who disputes or preaches some 									doctrine; speaking ofdappa-			n		m		arrogance; wantonnesspahārino.			adj		m.gen.s	when striking, assaulting, destroyingye 				pn		m.n.pl	whoever, those whote 				pn		m.n.pl	theydakkhanti 			v		pr.3.pl	they seevadanaṃ, 			n		nt.ac.s	the face; speech; utterancedhaññā 			adj		m.n.pl	fortunate; luckyte 				pn		m.n.pl	those,  theynara-				n		m		man; a human being.puṅgava. 			n		m,voc.s	o bull; o noble personwhen you roaring among the assembly, destroying those who hold the arrogance doctrine, they, who see (your) face, they lucky, o the Bull of Men!5. (KN 8.259)na vissase ekatiyesu evaṃ, agārisu pabbajitesu cāpi. na 				ind				notvissase 			v		opt.3.s	could trust (in), whould confide (in)ekatiyesu 			adj		m.loc.s	in someevaṃ, 			ind				thus; in this wayagārisu 			n		m.loc.pl	in householderspabbajitesu 		n		m.loc.pl	in monks (among)ca-				ind				andapi. 				ind				and; even; and then.thus could not trust in someone, among the householders and even monks.6.  (KN 14.73)saccaṃ kir-evam-āhaṃsu, narā ekacciyā idha.kaṭṭhaṃ uplāvitaṃ seyyo, na tv’ev’ekacciyo naro’ti. saccaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	truthkira-				ind				really; trulyevaṃ-			ind				thus; in this way			āhaṃsu, 			v		per.3.pl	they has saidnarā 				n		m.n.pl	men; a human beingsekacciyā 			adj		m.n.pl	some; certain; a fewidha.				ind				here; in this world or existencereally here some men has said the truthkaṭṭhaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	timber; a piece of wooduplāvitaṃ 			pp		nt.ac.s	floatedseyyo, 			ind				 it is better.na				ind				not tveva-			ind				however, but, rather, rather thanekacciyo 			adj		m.n.s		some; certain; a fewnaro’ti.			n		m.n.s		man; a human beinga certain man is not better rather than floated piece of wood.8. (DN 18.1) tena kho pana samayena bhagavā parito parito janapadesu paricārake abbhatīte kālaṅkate upapattīsu byākaroti … - “asu amutra upapanno, asu amutra upapannotena				pn		m.ins.s	by that kho 				ind				 indeed; really; surelypana 				ind				and; yet; but; and now; moreover.samayena 			n		m.ins.s	time; season; occasionbhagavā 			n		m.n.s		The Fortunate One, the Buddhaparito 			ind				round about; on every side; everywhereparito 			ind				round about; on every side; everywhere janapadesu 		n		m.loc.pl	in provinces; countries; country-sides.paricārake 			n		m.ac.pl	attendants, worshippers, followersabbhatīte 			adj		m.ac.pl	passed on, passed awaykālaṅkate 			pp		m.ac.pl	deadupapattīsu			n		f.loc.pl	in rebirths, re-arisingsbyākaroti 			v		pr.3.s		explain, definesasu 				pn		m.n.s		such and suchamutra 			ind				in such and such a place, there upapanno, 			pp		m.n.s		possessed of; come to existence in; 									reborn.at that time, the Blessed one explained about followers, who passed away everywhere in provinces, and rebirths in such and such a places, … “such and such was reborn in such and such a place, and such and such was reborn in such and such a place”    9.  (AN 3.71)gopālako sāyanhasamaye sāmikānaṃ gāvo niyyātetvā iti paṭisañcikkhati — ‘ajja kho gāvo amu(ka)smiñca amu(ka)smiñca padese cariṃsugopālako			n		m.n.s		cowherd	 sāyanha-			n		m		eveningsamaye 			n		m.loc.s	time; occasionsāmikānaṃ 		n		m.dat.pl	to the ownersgāvo 				n		m.ac.pl	cattleniyyātetvā 			v		abs		having given into charge; having given 									over; having assigned; having dedicatediti 				ind				thuspaṭisañcikkhati		v		pr.3.s		discriminates; considersajja 				ind				todaykho 				ind				indeedgāvo 				n		m.n.pl	cattleamusmiñ’ca		pn		loc		and in such and such amusmiñ’ca 		pn		loc		and in such and suchpadese 			n		m.loc.s	in region; place; district; location; spot. cariṃsu			v		aor.3.pl	they walkedcowherd in the evening time having given over cattle to the owners, considers: “indeed today cattle walked in such and such place”10. (AN 3.36)	 ambho purisa, na tvaṃ addasa manussesu tatiyaṃ devadūtaṃ pātubhūtan’ti? so evamāha — ‘nāddasaṃ, bhante’”ti. ambho			ind	(a particle employed to draw attention) 	hollo! hey! purisa, 			n		m.voc.s	male; manna 				ind				nottvaṃ 				pn		2.n.s		youaddasa 			v		aor.2.s	you saw							manussesu		n		m.loc.pl	in people tatiyaṃ 			adj		m.ac.s	the third.devadūtaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	gods' messengerpātubhūtan’ti? 		pp		m.ac.s	become manifest; appeared.so 				pn		m.n.s		he, thatevamāha			v		perf.3.s	he has saidna-addasaṃ, 		v		aor.1.s	I not sawbhante’”ti. 			n		m.voc.s	Venerable Sir“hey man! Did you not see the third gods' messenger appeared among people?” he has said: “I did not see, Venerable Sir.”   11.  (DN 20.2)sataṃ eke sahassānaṃ, amanussānamaddasuṃ.appekenantamaddakkhuṃ, disā sabbā phuṭā ahu(ṃ). 	sataṃ 			n		m.ac.s	hundred					eke 				adj		m.n.pl	somesahassānaṃ, 		n		nt.gen.pl	of thousandamanussānam-		n		m.gen.pl	of not human beingsaddasuṃ.			v		imp.3.pl	they sawsome saw hundred of thousand not human beingsapp’ = api			ind				moreover, further, and then, eveneke				adj		m.n.pl	some		anantaṃ-			adj				endless; limitless; infiniteaddakkhuṃ, 		v		imp.3.pl	they saw		disā 				n		f.n.pl		directionssabbā 			adj		f.n.pl		allphuṭā 			pp		f.n.pl		permeated (with), pervaded (with), 									suffused (with), filled (with)ahuṃ 			v		pr.3.pl	they wereand some saw infinite, all direction were pervaded12. (KN 12.2)adaṃsu te mamokāsaṃ, sodhetuṃ añjasaṃ tadā.adaṃsu 			v		aor.3.pl	they gavete 				pn		m.n.pl	theymaṃ-			pn		1.ac.s	meokāsaṃ, 			n		m.ac.s	room; open space; chance; permissionsodhetuṃ 			v		inf		to make clean, to purify añjasaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	 path; roadtadā.				ind				 then, as that timethen they gave me permission  to make clean the roadvicinanto tadā dakkhiṃ, dutiyaṃ sīlapāramiṃ.vicinanto 			pr.p		m.n.s		considering; discriminating; selecting.tadā 				ind				 then, as that timedakkhiṃ, 			v		aor.1.s	I sawdutiyaṃ 			adj		f.ac.s		the secondsīla-				n		nt		nature; habit; moral practice; code of 									morality. pāramiṃ.			n		f.ac.s		completeness; perfectionthen discriminating I saw the second perfection of morality.13. (AN 4.49)		 aniccaṃ aniccato dakkhuṃ, dukkhamaddakkhu dukkhato. aniccaṃ			n		nt.ac.s		impermanent	 		aniccato 			n		nt.abl.s		as impermanent	 dakkhuṃ,			v		imperf.3.pl		they has seen		 dukkham-			n		nt.ac.s		sufferingaddakkhu 			v		imperf.3.pl		they has seen	dukkhato. 			n		nt.abl.s		as sufferingThey have seen the impermanent as impermanent and what is suffering as suffering.14.  (AN 4.6)idha, bhikkhave, ekaccassa puggalassa appakaṃ sutaṃ hoti idha, 				ind					here; in this world or existence.bhikkhave, 			n		m.voc.pl		o monks!ekaccassa 			adj		m.dat.s		for some; certain; a few. puggalassa 		n		m.dat.s		for an individual; a personappakaṃ 			adj		nt.n.s			small; little; insignificantsutaṃ 			n		nt.n.s			learninghoti 				v		pr.3.s			iso monks!  here there is  little learning of a certain person15. (SN 36.5)	 yo sukhaṃ dukkhato adda, dukkhamaddakkhi sallato. yo 				pn		m.n.s			whoever, that whosukhaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		easily; comfortablydukkhato  			n		nt.abl.s		as sufferingadda, 			v		aor.3.s		he sawdukkhaṃ-			n		nt.ac.s		sufferingaddakkhi 			v		aor.3.s		he sawsallato. 			n		nt.abl.s		as an arrow, dart whoever saw the happyness as suffering, he saw suffering as a dart. 16.  (SN 12.66)		 yepi hi keci, bhikkhave, anāgatamaddhānaṃ ... taṃ aniccato dakkhissanti dukkhato dakkhissanti ... te taṇhaṃ pajahissanti.ye-				pn					whatever, those whichpi 				ind				 also: and also; even so; but; howeverhi 				ind					indeed, surelykeci,				pn		m.n.pl		somebhikkhave, 			n		m.voc.pl		o monks!anāgatamaddhānaṃ 		ind				in the future, lit. future timetaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s		thataniccato 			n		m.abl.s		as impermanentdakkhissanti 		v		fut.3.pl		they will seedukkhato 			n		nt.abl.s		as sufferingdakkhissanti 		v		fut.3.pl		they will seete 				pn		m.n.pl		theytaṇhaṃ 			n		f.ac.s			craving; thirst; lustpajahissanti.		v		fut.3.pl		they will give up; renounce; forsake; 									abandono monks!  indeed whoever in the future will see that as impermanent, they will see as suffering, they will give up craving. 17. (SN 9.3)	 suṇāti na vijānāti, āloketi na passati. dhammasmiṃ bhaññamānasmiṃ, atthaṃ bālo na bujjhati. “sacepi dasa pajjote, dhārayissasi kassapa. neva dakkhati rūpāni, cakkhu hissa na vijjatī”ti. 						suṇāti			v		pr.3.s		hears 			na				ind				not			vijānāti			v		pr.3.s		knows; understands; perceives; 										recognizes 			āloketi			v		pr.3.s		looks at or before 			na				ind				not			passati			v		pr.3.s		sees; finds; understands 			dhammasmiṃ		n		m.loc.s	in Dhamma			bhaññamānasmiṃ	pr.p		m.loc.s	in what is preaching, is speaking			atthaṃ			n		m.ac.s	meaning 			bālo				n		m.n.s		fool			na				ind				not			bujjhati			v		pr.3.s		knows; understands 			He listens but does not understand, he looks but does not see; Though the Dhamma is being spoken, The fool does not grasp the meaning						sace-				ind				if			pi				ind				also: and also; even so; but 			dasa				adj		m.n.s		ten 			pajjote			n		m.ac.pl	a lamps			dhārayissasi		v		fut.2.s	you will hold, keep, carrie			kassapa.			n		m.voc.s	o Kassapa!			Kassapa, even if you will bring ten lamps.						na-				ind				not			eva				ind				only, just			dakkhati			v		pr.3.s		he sees			rūpāni,			n		nt.ac.pl	forms, material objects			cakkhu			n		nt.n.s		the eye 			hi-				ind				indeed			assa				pn		m.dat.s	for this, for him			na				ind				not			vijjati				v		pr.3.s		exists; to be found 			ti				ind					’’			he just not see a forms, for him eye not exists.		18.  (SN 3.16)itthīpi hi ekacciyā, seyyo posā janādhipa.medhāvinī sīlavatī, sassudevā patibbatā. itthī-				n		f.n.s		woman; femalepi				ind				also: and also; even so; but hi 				ind				indeed	ekacciyā, 			adj		m.abl.s	some; certain; a fewseyyo 			ind				 it is better, superiorposā 				n		m.abl.s	from manjanādhipa.			n		m.voc.s	o kingo king, indeed even a woman is better than some man.medhāvinī			n		f.n.s		a wise woman sīlavatī, 			n		f.n.s		Sīlavatisassudevā			n		f.n.s		mother-in-law of a king	patibbatā.			n		f.n.s		a devoted wifea wise woman Sīlavati, a devoted wife, a mother-in-law of a king	
 Examples 71. SN 22.96atthi nu kho, bhante, kiñci rūpaṃ … kāci vedanā … kāci saññā … keci saṅkhārā … kiñci viññāṇaṃ niccaṃ dhuvaṃ sassataṃatthi 				v		pr.3.s		there isnu kho, 			ind				does? is? would?bhante, 			n		m.voc.s	o Venerablekiñci 				pn		nt.n.s		somerūpaṃ 			n		nt.n.s		form, material formkāci 				pn		f.n.s		somevedanā 			n		f.n.s		feelingkāci 				pn		f.n.s		some saññā 			n		f.n.s		perceptionkeci 				pn		m.n.pl	somesaṅkhārā 			n		m.n.pl	intentionskiñci 				pn		nt.n.s		some	viññāṇaṃ 			n		nt.n.s		consciousnessniccaṃ 			adj		nt.n.s		constant; continuous; permanentdhuvaṃ 			adj		nt.n.s		stable, permanent; certain, regular sassataṃ			adj		nt.n.s		eternal, perpetualo Venerable, is there some form … some feeling … some perception … some intentions …  some consciousness -  constant,  permanent,  eternal ?2. (SN 1.71)	 kiṃsu chetvā sukhaṃ seti, kiṃsu chetvā na socati.kissassu ekadhammassa, vadhaṃ rocesi gotamā”ti. kiṃ’su			pn 		m.ac.s	what? who? which?chetvā 			v		abs		having cut off or severedsukhaṃ 			ind				easily; comfortablyseti, 				v		pr.3.s		sleepskiṃ’su 			pn 		m.ac.s	what? who? which?chetvā 			v		abs		having cut off or severedna 				ind				notsocati.			v		pr.3.s		mourns; grieveshaving cut off what he sleeps comfortably? having cut off what he does not grieve?kissa’ssu 			pn		m.gen.s	of what? who? which?		eka-				adj				one, singledhammassa, 		n		m.gen.s	of thingvadhaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	striking, killing; slaughter, destruction, 									executionrocesi 			v		aor.3.s	gave one's consent; likedgotamā”ti. 			n		m.n.s		Gotamadestruction of what a single thing, Gotama  gave one's consent  ?3. SN 12.10	  “tassa mayhaṃ, bhikkhave, etadahosi — ‘kimhi nu kho sati jarāmaraṇaṃ hoti, kiṃpaccayā jarāmaraṇan’ti ?tassa 			pn		m.dat.s	to that, with reference to thatmayhaṃ, 			pn		1.dat.s	to mebhikkhave, 			n		m.voc.pl	o monksetadahosi 			v		aor.3.s	this waskimhi				pn 		m.loc.s	in (when) what? who? which?			nu kho  			ind				does? is? would?sati 				adj		m.loc.s	in (when) existingjarāmaraṇaṃ 		n		nt.n.s		old age and deathhoti, 				v		pr.3.s		is, there iskiṃ				pn 		nt.n.s		what? who? which?paccayā 			n		m.abl.s	from cause; votive; requisite; means; 									supportjarāmaraṇan’ti  		n		nt.n.s		old age and deatho monks, this was (occur) to me : when what existing there is an old age and death? from what cause is old age and death? 4. (KN 11.17)evaṃ vilāpamānaṃ taṃ, ānandaṃ āha gotamī.evaṃ 			ind				thus; in this wayvilāpamānaṃ 		pr.p		m.ac.s	wailing, talking nonsense, babbling 									incoherentlytaṃ, 				pn		m.ac.s	that, sheānandaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	Ānandaāha 				v		perf.3.s	 she has saidgotamī.			n		f.n.s		a woman of the Gotama clan, Gotamīthus Gotamī has said to wailing Ānanda.na yuttaṃ socituṃ putta, hāsakāle upaṭṭhite.na 				ind				notyuttaṃ 			ind				proper, suitable, right, appropriate		?socituṃ 			v		inf		to mourn; to grieveputta, 			n		voc		a son; a child.hāsakāle 			n		m.loc.s	in (when) time to be joyful.upaṭṭhite.			pp		m.loc.s	in (when) got ready; arrived; presented; 								served by.not suitable to grieve, son, when time to be joyful presented.   5. (KN 10.8)allavatthā allasirā, sabbeva pañjalīkatā.buddhassa pāde nipatitvā, idaṃ vacanam-abravuṃallavatthā 			adj		m.n.pl	with wet clothesallasirā, 			adj		m.n.pl	with a wet headsabba-			adj		m.n.pl	all; every; whole; entireeva 				ind				only, even, justpañjali-			adj				holding up hands palms togetherkatā.				pp		m.n.pl	done, madebuddhassa 		n		m.gen.s	of the Enlightened One, the Buddhapāde 				n		m.loc.s	in the foot; legnipatitvā, 			v		abs		having fallen downidaṃ 				pn				thisvacanam-			n		nt.ac.s	utterance; word; saying; a term; 										an expressionabravuṃ			v		aor.3.pl	they saidwith wet clothes, with a wet head, just holding up hands palms together, having fallen down to the foot of the Buddha, they said this utterance6. (KN 6.53)tava ratanavarassa dhammaṃ sutvā, karissāmīti ca bravittha chatto. tava 				pn		dat/gen	yourratanavarassa 		n		nt.dat/gen 	of the best of gems.dhammaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	the Teachingsutvā, 			v		abs		having heardkarissāmī’ti 		v		fut.1.s	I will do; act; makeca 				ind				andbravittha 			v		aor.3.pl	saidchatto. 			n		m.n.s		pupil, a student‘having heard the Teaching of your the best of gems, ‘I will act’ said the student.7. (KN 8.263)evañce taṃ jano jaññā, yathā jānāmi taṃ ahaṃ.ārakā parivajjeyya, gūthaṭṭhānaṃva pāvuseevañ-				ind				thus; in this wayce 				ind				iftaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	himjano 				n		m.n.s		a person; a man; the peoplejaññā, 			v		opt.3.s	could knowyathā 			ind				as; like; just as.jānāmi 			v		pr.1.s		I knowtaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	him 	ahaṃ.			pn		1.n.s		Iārakā 			ind				far off, far from, away fromparivajjeyya, 		v		opt.3.s	could shun; avoid; keep away fromgūtha-			n				 faeces; dung; excrementṭhānaṃ-			n		nt.ac.s	a place; a locality; a spotva 				ind				likepāvuse			n		m.loc.s	in rainy-seasonif the people could know him, as I know him, (they) would keep away from, as a place of excrement in rainy-season8. (KN 9.35)yaṃ tvaṃ kāmaratiṃ brūsi, aratī dāni sā mama.yaṃ 				pn		f.ac.s		whatevertvaṃ 				pn		2.n.s		youkāmaratiṃ			n		f.ac.s		enjoyment of sensual pleasuresbrūsi, 			v		pr.2.s		you say; speakaratī				n		f.n.s		non-attachment; aversion			dāni 				ind				nowsā 				pn		f.n.s		thatmama.			pn		1.dat.s	to mewhatever you speak as enjoyment of sensual pleasures, now that is non-attachment for me 9. (KN 10.23)vuṭṭhahitvā samādhimhā, satthā loke anuttaro.mama kammaṃ pakittento, idaṃ vacanamabravi. vuṭṭhahitvā 		v		abs		having risen; having arisen; 											having emerged fromsamādhimhā, 		n		m.abl.s	from perfect peace of mind, stability of 									mind, stillness of mindsatthā 			n		m.n.s		teacherloke 				n		m.loc.s	in worldanuttaro.			adj		m.n.s		"nothing higher", without a superior, 									incomparablemama			pn		1.gen.s	my kammaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	 deed; action; job; workpakittento, 			pr.p		m.n.s		speaking highly; praising; explaining.idaṃ 				pn				thisvacanaṃ			n		nt		utterance; word; saying; a term;										 an expressionabravi. 			v		aor		sayed; spokehaving emerged from perfect peace of mind, incomparable teacher in the world,  praising  my  action, he spoke this  utterance10. (DN 3.7)kimetaṃ bhavaṃ gotamo āha? punabhavaṃ gotamo bravitū”tikiṃ				pn		m.ac.s	who? which?etaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	thatbhavaṃ 			n		m.n.s		Sir, Lord, Venerablegotamo 			n		m.n.s		Gotamaāha 				v		perf.3.s.	he has saidpuna-			ind				againbhavaṃ 			n		m.n.s		Sir, Lord, Venerable gotamo 			n		m.n.s		Gotama bravitū”ti			v		imp.3.s	let him saywhat has said Sir Gotama ? let Sir Gotama say again!  11.  (KN 10.23)pupphāsanaṃ paññapetvā, sādhucittaṃ manoramaṃ.narasārathinaṃ aggaṃ, idaṃ vacanamabraviṃ. puppha-			n				flowerasanaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	seatpaññapetvā, 		v		abs		having regulated, made a rule; 										made known; declared; preparedsādhucittaṃ 		adj		nt.ac.s	 well-decked.manoramaṃ.		adj		nt.ac.s	 delightfulnarasārathinaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	trainer of menaggaṃ, 			adj		m.ac.s	the highest; the top-most.idaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	thisvacanaṃ			n		nt		utterance; word; saying; a term;										 an expressionabravi. 			v		aor		sayed; spokehaving prepared a flower seat,  well-decked and delightful, (for) the highest trainer of men, he sayed this utterance   12.  (SN 3.4)	 ‘ye ca kho keci kāyena duccaritaṃ caranti, … tesaṃ appiyo attā’. kiñcā’pi te evaṃ vadeyyuṃ — ‘piyo me attā’ti, atha kho tesaṃ appiyo attā. taṃ kissa hetu?‘ye 				pn		m.n.pl	whoeverca 				ind				andkho 				ind				indeedkeci 				pn		m.n.pl	somekāyena 			n		m.ins.s	by bodyduccaritaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	 bad conduct; wrong action.caranti			v		pr.3.pl	act, behave, practises; performstesaṃ 			pn		m.dat.pl	to themappiyo 			adj		m.n.s		unpleasant; disagreeable, not lovingattā’. 				n		m.n.s		soul; oneselfkiñcāpi			ind				however much, even if, even thoughte 				pn		m.n.pl	theyevaṃ 			ind				thusvadeyyuṃ			v		opt.3.pl	they may saypiyo  				adj		m.n.s		pleasant; agreeable, dear		me 				pn		1.dat.s	to me	attā’ti,			n		m.n.s		soul; oneself atha kho 			ind				and thentesaṃ 			pn		m.dat.pl	to themappiyo  			adj		m.n.s		unpleasant; disagreeableattā. 				n		m.n.s		soul; oneself taṃ 				pn		nt.n.s		that kissa 				pn		m.gen.s	of what? which?					hetu?				n		m.n.s		cause; reason; conditionindeed some performs bad conduct by body, for them the self is disagreeable,  even if they may say thus : “or me the self is dear” ,  and then for them  the self is disagreeable. what is the reason for that? 13. Vin 4, 1.6atha kho bhagavā imaṃ udānaṃ udānesi — “aññāsi vata, bho koṇḍañño, aññāsi vata bho koṇḍañño”ti.atha kho 			ind				and thanbhagavā 			n		m.n.s		the Fortunate One, the Buddha.imaṃ 			pn				thisudānaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	an emotional utterance.udānesi 			v		aor.3.s	has utter something with intense emotionaññāsi 			v		aor.3.s	knewvata, 				ind				indeedbho 				ind				my dear; friendkoṇḍañño, 			n		m.n.s		Kondaññaaññāsi 			v		aor.3.s	knewvata 				ind				indeedbho 				ind				my dear; friendkoṇḍañño, 			n		m.n.s		Kondaññaand than  the Buddha has utter an emotional utterance with intense emotion: “Indeed, my dear Kondañña, he knew. indeed my dear Kondañña, he knew”14. (SN 22.35)“yathā kathaṃ pana tvaṃ, bhikkhu, mayā saṃkhittena bhāsitassa vitthārena atthaṃ ājānāsī”ti?“yathā 			ind				as; like; just askathaṃ 			ind				how?pana 				ind				and; yet; but; and now; moreovertvaṃ, 			pn		2.n.s		youbhikkhu, 			n		m.voc.s	o monk!mayā 			pn		1.ins.s	by mesaṃkhittena 		pp		m.ins.s	with contracted; abridged; shortened; 										foldedbhāsitassa 			pp		m.gen.s	of said; spoken; shonevitthārena 			n		m.ins.s	with explanation; detail; the breadthatthaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	meaningājānāsī”ti?			v		aoe.2.s	you knew; understood.and just how, o monk, you understood meaning with explanation of my utterance in brief ? 15. (SN 22.80)atha kho bhagavā kismiñcideva pakaraṇe bhikkhusaṅghaṃ paṇāmetvā pubbaṇhasamayaṃ nivāsetvā pattacīvaramādāya kapilavatthuṃ piṇḍāya pāvisi.atha kho 			ind				and thanbhagavā 			n		m.n.s		the Fortunate One, the Buddhakismiñci-			pn		m.loc.s	in someeva 				ind				only, even, justpakaraṇe 			n		m.loc.s	in performance, undertaking paragraph, 								occasion, exposition, arrangement, literary 								work, compositionbhikkhusaṅghaṃ		n		m.ac.s	congregation of monks 	paṇāmetvā 		v		abs		having dismissed; having ejected; 									having shut; having stretched out.pubbaṇha-			n		m		forenoonsamayaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	time; occasionnivāsetvā 			v		abs		having dressed oneself; 											having got clothed or dressed.patta-			n				a bowlcīvaraṃ-			n				the (upper) robe of a Buddhistādāya 			v		abs		having takenkapilavatthuṃ		n		nt.ac.s	Kapilavatthu piṇḍāya 			n		dat		for alms.pāvisi.			v		aor.3.s	gone in; enteredand than the Buddha just in some occasion  having dismissed congregation of monks, at forenoon time having dressed oneself, bowl and robe having taken, he entered  Kapilavatthu for alms.16. (SN 22.81)ekova bhagavā tasmiṃ samaye viharitukāmo hoti; na bhagavā tasmiṃ samaye kenaci anubandhitabboeko-				adj		m.n.s		one, alongeva 				ind				only, even, just bhagavā 			n		m.n.s		the Fortunate One, the Buddha tasmiṃ 			pn		m.loc.s	in thatsamaye 			n		m.loc.s	time; occasionviharitukāmo 		adj		m.n.s		wishing to livehoti; 				v		pr.3.s		isna 				ind				notbhagavā 			n		m.n.s		the Fortunate One, the Buddha  tasmiṃ 			pn		m.loc.s	in thatsamaye 			n		m.loc.s	time; occasionkenaci 			pn		m.ins.s	by someoneanubandhitabbo		ptp		m.n.s		should be followed; pursuedat that time the Buddha wishing to live along, he should not be followed by someone at that time17. KN-a Dhp, 6,4jeṭṭhakapesakārassa bhariyā kenacideva karaṇīyena bārāṇasiṃ gacchantī te paccekabuddhe disvā vanditvā ‘kiṃ, bhante, avelāya āgatatthā’ti pucchijeṭṭhaka-			n				chief; fore-mostpesakārassa 		n		gen		of weaverbhariyā 			n		f		the wifekenaci 			pn		m.ins.s	with someeva 				ind				only, even, just  karaṇīyena 		ptp		m.ins.s	with ought to be done, duty, business.bārāṇasiṃ 			n		f.ac.s		the city of Benaresgacchantī 			v		pr.3.pl	go; move; walkte				pn	 	m.ac.pl	those, thempacceka-			n				each one, single, by oneself, separate, 									various severalbuddhe 			n		m.ac.pl	the Enlightened One.disvā 			v		abs		having seen; having found; 											having understoodvanditvā 			v		abs		having saluted; paid homage; 										having honoured; having adored.kiṃ, 				ind				who? which?bhante, 			n		m.voc.s	Venerable, Siravelāya			n		f.ins.s	with improper timeāgata-			pp				come, arrivedatthā’ti			n		m.n.s		purposepucchi			v		aor.3.s	asked; questionedthe wife of foremost weaver move to the city of Benares with some business, those Paccekabuddhas having seen, having paid homage. “Venerable, what is a purpose of coming by improper time?” she asked.  18. (DN 16.14)yassa kassaci, ānanda, cattāro iddhipādā bhāvitā bahulīkatā ,..., so ākaṅkhamāno kappaṃ vā tiṭṭheyya kappāvasesaṃ vā.yassa 			pn		m.dat.s	of whoeverkassaci, 			pn		m.dat.s	of someānanda, 			n		m.voc.s	Ānandacattāro 			adj		m.n.pl	fouriddhipādā 			n		m.n.pl	basis of psychic powerbhāvitā 			pp		m.n.pl	increased; cultivated; developedbahulīkatā 			pp		m.n.pl	practised frequentlyso 				pn		m.n.s		he, thatākaṅkhamāno 		prp		m.n.s		wishing for; desiringkappaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	an aeonvā 				ind				ortiṭṭheyya 			v		opt.3.s	could stand; stay; abide; last; remain, 									determinekappāvasesaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	remainder of an aeonvā. 				ind				orĀnanda, for somone the four psychic power increased and practised frequently, he wishing for an aeon or  could determine for remainder of an aeon.19. (SN 22.2)	 paṇḍitā hāvuso, manussā vīmaṃsakā — ‘kismiṃ panāyasmantānaṃ chandarāgavinayakkhāyī satthā’ti?paṇḍitā 			adj		m.n.pl	wiseha-				ind				an emphatic particle "hey, oh, hallo I say"āvuso, 			n		m		 friend; brothermanussā 			n		m.n.pl	a human beinga, menvīmaṃsakā			adj		m.n.pl	 testing, investigating, examiningkismiṃ 			pn		m.loc.s	in who? which? what?pana-			ind				and; yet; but; and now; moreover.āyasmantānaṃ 		n		m.gen.pl	of Venerableschandarāga-		n				 desire and cravingvinaya-			n				removal.akkhāyī 			adj		m.n.s		 telling, relating, announcingsatthā’ti?			n		m.n.s		teacherhey friend, wise men are examining . “In what way the teacher of the Venerables announcing removal of desire and craving?”20. (SN 22.102)ye keci pupphagandhā, vassikaṃ tesaṃ aggam-akkhāyatiye 				pn		m.n.pl	whoeverkeci 				pn		m.n.pl	somepupphagandhā, 		adj		m.n.p		odouring of flowersvassikaṃ 			n		nt.n.s		jasmintesaṃ 			pn		m.gen.pl	among those, of themaggaṃ-			adj				the highest; the top-mostakkhāyati			v.pass	pr.3.s		is declared; is called, is stated to be; 									is named, is seem to besomeone odouring of flowers, jasmin is seem to be the highest among them 
 Examples 81. (KN 12.18)koṭisatānaṃ navutīnaṃ, asītiyāpi ca koṭinaṃ.ete āsuṃ tayo ṭhānā, vimalānaṃ samāgame. koṭi-				adj		f		ten millionsatānaṃ 			adj		nt.gen.pl	of hundrednavutīnaṃ, 		adj		f.gen.pl	of ninetyasītiyā-			adj		f.gen.s	eightypi 				ind				 also: and also; even so; but; howeverca 				ind				andkoṭīnaṃ.			adj		f.gen.pl	ten millionete 				pn		m.n.pl	theseāsuṃ 			v		aor.3.pl	 they were. tayo 				adj		m.n.pl	threeṭhānā, 			n		m.n.pl	groups, divisionsvimalānaṃ 			adj		m.gen.pl	of clean; spotless; unstainedsamāgame. 		n		m.ac.pl	assembliesof hundred ten millions, of ninety (ten millions) and of eighty ten millions, there were three groups, assemblies of spotless (people).2. KN-a Dhp, 9, 1.mahā-			adj				great, extensive, bigekasāṭako 			n		m.n.s		Ekasātakacatusaṭṭhiyā 		adj		f.loc.s	in (among) sixty-foursāṭakayugesu		n		nt.loc.pl	in (among) suits of clothes dve 				adj		-.ac.pl	twoaggahesi,			v		aor.3.s 	tookayaṃ 			pn		m.ac.s	thispana				ind				and; yet; but; and now; moreover. battiṃsāya 			adj		f.loc.s	in thirty-twoladdha-			pp				obtained; receivedkāle 				n		m.loc.s	in timedve 				adj		m.ac.pl	twoaggahesi.			v		aor.3.s 	tookgreat Ekasātaka took two among sixty-four  suits of clothes, moreover he took this two among thirty-two received time								?  3. KN-a Dhp, 4, 8.manussānaṃ vārentānaṃ vārentānameva saṭṭhisahassā balavagāvo ca saṭṭhisahassā dhenuyo ca nikkhantā,manussānaṃ 		n		m.gen.pl	when human beingvārentānaṃ 		prp		m.gen.pl 	when preventing; obstructing; hindering.vārentānam-		prp		m.gen.pl 	preventing; obstructing; hinderingeva 				ind				only, even, justsaṭṭhi-			adj		f.		sixtysahassā 			adj		m.n.pl	thousandbalava-gāvo 		n		m.n.pl	strong oxesca 				ind				andsaṭṭhisahassā 		adj		m.n.pl	sixty thousanddhenuyo 			n		f.n.pl		cowsca 				ind				and nikkhantā,			pp		m.n.pl	exited, escaped, went out, got outwhen people preventing even obstructing (them), sixty thousand strong oxes and sixty thousand cows were escaped   4. KN-a Dhp, 4, 3.rājā … etth’ev’assa dvattiṃsāya puttehi saddhiṃ sīsaṃ chinditvā āharathā’ti tena saddhiṃ aññe’pi samatthe yodhe pesesi.rājā				n		m.n.s		kingettha-				ind				hereeva- 				ind				only, even, justassa 				pm		m.gen.s	hisdvattiṃsāya		adj		f.ins.s	with thirty-two puttehi 			n		m.ins.pl	with sons; childrensaddhiṃ 			ind				with; togethersīsaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	the headchinditvā 			v		abs		having cut; having destroyedāharathā’ti 			v		imp.2.pl	you bring; fetche, producetena 				pn		m.ins.s	with themsaddhiṃ 			ind				with; together aññe’				adj		m.ac.pl	 other; another; elsepi 				ind				 also: and also; even so; but; however samatthe 			adj		m.ac.pl	able; skilfulyodhe 			n		m.ac.pl	soldierspesesi.			v		aor.3.s	sent out or forth; employed; sent for.“Just right now having cut (his) head together with thirty-two his sons bring (them) !” king sent out together them also another skilful soldiers.5. KN-a Dhp, 9, 1rājā … cattāro hatthī cattāro asse cattāri kahāpaṇasahassāni catasso itthiyo catasso dāsiyo cattāro purise caturo gāmavare”ti evaṃ yāva sabbasatā cattāri cattāri katvā sabbacatukkaṃ nāma assa dāpesi. rājā				n		m.n.s		kingcattāro 			adj		m.ac.pl	fourhatthī 			n		m.ac.pl	elephantscattāro 			adj		m.ac.pl	four asse 				n		m.ac.pl	horse	s		cattāri 			adj		nt.ac.pl	fourkahāpaṇa-			n		nt		coinsahassāni 			n		nt.ac.pl	thousandcatasso  			adj		f.ac.pl	four itthiyo			n		f.ac.pl	 women; females catasso   			adj		f.ac.pl	four dāsiyo 			n		f.ac.pl	female slavescattāro 			adj		m.ac.pl	four  purise 			n		m.ac.pl	mencaturo 			adj		m.n.s		clever; skilled; shrewd.gāma-			n				villagevare”ti 			adj		m.ac.pl	excellent; nobleevaṃ 			ind				thus; in this wayyāva 				ind				up to; as far as; so far thatsabbasatā 			adj		nt.n.pl	consisting a hundred of each		cattāri cattāri 		adj		nt.ac.pl	group of fourkatvā 			v		abs		having done or madesabba-			adj				all; every; whole; entirecatukkaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	 a set of four; a cross road.nāma 			ind				certainly, truly, for sure			assa 				pn		m.dat.s	to himdāpesi. 			v		aor.3.s	induced to give“four elephants,  four horses, four thousand coins, four women, four female slaves,  four men, four  excellent vilages” having made group of four consisting a hundred of each, king induced to give certainly all set of four to him.6. KN-a Dhp, 6, 4“atthi, deva, ito vīsatiyojanasatamatthake sāvatthi nāma nagaraṃ, tato āgacchāmā”ti.“atthi, 			v		pr.3.s		there isdeva, 			n		m.voc.s	o Deva, o kingito 				ind				from here; from now; hencevīsati-			n				twentyyojana-			n				7 miles, 11 km sata-				adj				hundred matthake 			ind				at the distance of. sāvatthi 			n		f.n.s		Sāvatthināma 			ind				with name nagaraṃ, 			n		nt.n.s		town; a citadeltato 				ind				 from there; from that; thence; therefore; 								thereuponāgacchāmā”ti.		v		pr.1.pl	we come to; approache.o king, there is a town with name Sāvatthi at big distance of twenty hundreds yojanas from here,  we are coming from there. 7. (KN 10.365)dvenavute ito kappe, yaṃ bhisamadadiṃ tadā.duggatiṃ nābhijānāmi, bhisadānassidaṃ phalaṃ. dvenavute 			adj		m.ac.pl	ninety two							ito 				ind				from here; from now; hence.kappe, 			n		m.ac.pl	world cycles; an aeonsyaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	whateverbhisaṃ-			n		nt.ac.s	the root of lotus plantadadiṃ 			v		aor.1.s	I gavetadā.				ind				 then, at that timeduggatiṃ 			n		f.ac.s		a realm of miserable existencen’ābhijānāmi,		v 		pr.1.s		I not know fully or by experience; 										I am not awarebhisa-			n				the root of lotus plantdānass-			n		gen		of giving, charityidaṃ 				pn		nt.n.s		thisphalaṃ. 			n		nt.n.s		resultninety two aeons (ago) from now, at that time whatever root of lotus plant gave, therefore I not experiance a realm of miserable existence, this is result of giving root of lotus plant.	  8. DHP 153				anekajātisaṃsāraṃ, sandhāvissaṃ anibbisaṃ.gahakāraṃ gavesanto, dukkhā jāti punappunaṃ. aneka-			adj				manyjātisaṃsāraṃ		n		m.ac.s	cycle of rebirth, round of birthssandhāvissaṃ 		v		irr.aor.1.s	I ran through; transmigratedanibbisaṃ.			prp		m.n.s		not finding gaha-				n				 housekāraṃ 			n		m.ac.s	 maker.gavesanto, 		prp		m.n.s		 seeking; searching for; striving afterdukkhā 			adj		f.n.s		 suffering; painful, bring discomfort. jāti 				n		f.n.s		birth; rebirthpunappunaṃ.		ind				again and again many rounds of births, I ran through, not finding, searching for house-maker, rebirth again and again is painful.9. (KN 6.30)tuvañca bhante anukampakaṃ viduṃ, upecca vandiṃ kusalañca pucchisaṃ. tuvaṃ-			pn		2.n.s		youca 				ind				andbhante 			n		m.voc.s	Reverend Sir; O lordanukampakaṃ 		adj		m.ac.s	compassionate; one who has pityviduṃ, 			adj		m.ac.s	wise; skilled in. (m.) a wise man.upecca 			v		abs		having approachedvandiṃ 			v		aor.1.s	I saluted; paid homage; honouredkusalañ’ca 			n		nt.ac.s	welfare; well beingpucchisaṃ. 		v.irreg	aor.1.s	I asked; questioned.O lord you are compassionate and wise, having approached I paid homage, and questioned about welfare.  10. (KN 8.261)kuṭṭamūlañca nissāya, ālopaṃ taṃ abhuñjisaṃ.kuṭṭa-				n				a wallmūlaṃ-			n		nt.ac.s	root; foot; foundationca 				ind				andnissāya, 			v		abs		leaning (on), depending (on), 										being supported (by)ālopaṃ 			n		m.ac.s	a morsel; a bit; lumptaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	that, heabhuñjisaṃ.		v.irreg	aor.1.s	I ate; enjoyed.leaning on the foot of a wall, I ate that morsel11.  (KN 8.139)ayoniso manasikārā, maṇḍanaṃ anuyuñjisaṃ.ayoniso 			ind				improperly; injudiciously, unwiselymanasikārā, 		n		m.abl.s	from reflection; attentionmaṇḍanaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	adornment; decorationanuyuñjisaṃ.		v.irreg	aor.1.s	I engaged in; questioned; gave oneself up.from unwise attention, I was engaged in adornment.12. (KN 6.15)uposathaṃ upavasissaṃ, sadā sīlesu saṃvutā.uposathaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	Uposathaupavasissaṃ, 		v.ireg		aor.1.s	I observed sadā 				ind				ever; alwayssīlesu 			n		nt.loc.pl	in moral practice; code of moralitysaṃvutā.			pp		m.n.pl	restrained; shut; covered			I observed Uposatha, always restrained in morality 13. (KN 8.227)tattha naṃ upasaṅkamma, vandissaṃ purisuttamaṃtattha 			ind				there; in that place.naṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	that, himupasaṅkamma, 		v		abs		having approached.vandissaṃ 			v.irreg	aor.1.s	I saluted; paid homage; honouredpurisuttamaṃ		n		m.ac.s	the Highest of menthere having approached him, I paid homage to the Highest of men.anucaṅkamissaṃ virajaṃ, sabbasattānamuttamaṃ.anucaṅkamissaṃ 	v.irreg	aor.1.s	I followed after, went aftervirajaṃ, 			adj				stainless; free from defilementsabba-			adj				all; every; whole; entiresattānam-			n		m.gen.s	of living beingsuttamaṃ.			adj		m.ac.s	highest; best; noble; excellentI followed after the stainless, the best of all beings14. (KN 3.78) 	  yesaṃ paññāsaṃ piyāni, paññāsaṃ tesaṃ dukkhāni; yesaṃ cattārīsaṃ piyāni, cattārīsaṃ tesaṃ dukkhāni, yesaṃ tiṃsaṃ piyāni, tiṃsaṃ tesaṃ dukkhāni; yesaṃ vīsaṃ piyāni, vīsaṃ tesaṃ dukkhāniyesaṃ 			pn		m.dat.pl		for which; what; whatever.paññāsaṃ 			adj		f.ac.s			50, fifty						piyāni,			n		nt.ac.pl		dear thingspaññāsaṃ 			adj		f.ac.s			50							tesaṃ 			pn		m.dat.pl		for themdukkhāni;			n		nt.ac.pl		sufferings; pains; discomforts, 										troubles yesaṃ 			pn		m.dat.pl		for which; what; whatever.cattārīsaṃ 			adj		f.ac.s				40, fortypiyāni, 			n		nt.ac.pl		dear thingscattārīsaṃ			adj		f.ac.s			40, forty 	tesaṃ 			pn		m.dat.pl		for themdukkhāni,			n		nt.ac.pl		sufferings; pains; discomforts, 										troubles   yesaṃ 			pn		m.dat.pl		for which; what; whatever.tiṃsaṃ 			adj		f.ac.s			30, thirtypiyāni, 			n		nt.ac.pl		dear thingstiṃsaṃ 			adj		f.ac.s			30, thirtytesaṃ 			pn		m.dat.pl		for themdukkhāni,			n		nt.ac.pl		sufferings; pains; discomforts, 										troubles   yesaṃ 			pn		m.dat.pl		for which; what; whatever.vīsaṃ	 		adj		f.ac.s			20, twentypiyāni, 			n		nt.ac.pl		dear thingsvīsaṃ			adj		f.ac.s			20, twenty	tesaṃ 			pn		m.dat.pl		for themdukkhāni,			n		nt.ac.pl		sufferings; pains; discomforts, 										troubles   who have a fifty dear things, for them there is fifty troubles, who have a forty dear things, for them there is forty troubles, who have a thirty dear things, for them there is thirty troubles, who have a twenty dear things, for them there is twenty troubles.15. DN-atesaṭṭhiyā nagarasahassesu, navanavutiyā doṇamukhasatasahassesu, channavutiyā paṭṭanakoṭisatasahassesu, chapaṇṇāsāya ratanākaresūti sakalajambudīpe, … , devatā sannipatitātesaṭṭhiyā 			adj		f.loc.pl		in sixty-threenagara-			n		nt			town; a citadelsahassesu, 		adj		nt.loc.pl		in thousandnava-navutiyā 		adj		f.loc.pl		in ninety ninedoṇamukha-		n					river mouthsatasahassesu, 		adj		nt.loc.pl		in hundred thousandcha-n’navutiyā 		adj		f.loc.pl		in ninety sixpaṭṭana-			n		nt			a port; a town near a port.koṭi-				adj		f			ten millionsatasahassesu, 		adj		nt.loc.pl		in hundred thousands.cha-paṇṇāsāya 		f		f.loc.pl		in fifty sixratanā-			n		nt			gem, jewelkaresū-			adj		m.loc.pl		in producing, causing, forming, 										making, doingti 				ind					“”sakala-			adj					whole; entirejambudīpe			n		m.loc.s		the country of the rose-apples; i.e. 										lndia.devatā 			n		f.n.pl			deities.sannipatitā-		pp		f.n.pl			assembled; come togetherti 				ind					“”in sixty-three thousands towns, in ninety nine hundred thousands river mouthes, in ninety six ten million hundred thousands, in fifty six jewel-making (places), in all lndia, … , deities assembled16. (DN 1.6)	 idha, bhikkhave, ekacco samaṇo vā brāhmaṇo vā … anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarati. seyyathidaṃ — ekam’pi jātiṃ dve’pi jātiyo tisso’pi jātiyo catasso’pi jātiyo pañca’pi jātiyo dasa’pi jātiyo vīsam’pi jātiyo tiṃsam’pi jātiyoidha, 				ind					here; in this world or existence. bhikkhave, 			n		m.voc.pl		o monks!ekacco 			adj		m.n.s			some; certain; a few.samaṇo 			n		m.n.s			reclusevā 				ind					orbrāhmaṇo 			n		m.n.s			brahman, priestvā 				ind					or anekavihitaṃ 		adj		m.ac.s		of different kinds; various.pubbenivāsaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		one's former state of existence.anussarati. 		v		pr.3.s			remembersseyyathidaṃ		ind					as follows 	ekam’pi 			adj		f.ac.s			and one jātiṃ 				n		f.ac.s			birthdve’pi 			adj		f.ac.pl		and twojātiyo 			n		f.ac.pl		birthstisso’pi  			adj		f.ac.pl		and threejātiyo 			n		f.ac.pl		birthscatasso’pi 			adj		f.ac.pl		and fourjātiyo 			n		f.ac.pl		birthspañca’pi  			adj		f.ac.pl		and fivejātiyo 			n		f.ac.pl		birthsdasa’pi  			adj		f.ac.pl		and 10jātiyo 			n		f.ac.pl		birthsvīsam’pi  			adj		f.ac.pl		and 20jātiyo 			n		f.ac.pl		birthstiṃsam’pi  			adj		f.ac.pl		and 30jātiyo				n		f.ac.pl		birthso monks! here  some recluse or priest, … ,  remembers  various one's former state of existence,  as follows:  one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, 10 births, 20 births, 30 births, … 17. (DN 19.15)pabbajitaṃ pana mahā-govindaṃ brāhmaṇaṃ … satta ca nhātaka-satāni cattārīsā ca bhariyā sādisiyo anekāni ca khattiya-sahassāni … anupabbajiṃsu.pabbajitaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		monkpana 				ind					and; yet; but; moreovermahāgovindaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		Mahāgovindabrāhmaṇaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		brahmansatta 				adj		-.n.pl			seven (7)				ca				ind					and nhātaka-			n					graduate, lit: one who has bathedsatāni 			adj		nt.n.pl		hundredcattārīsā 			adj		f.n.pl			fortyca				ind					and  bhariyā 			n		f.n.pl			wifessādisiyo 			adj		m.n.s			like; similar, equalanekāni 			adj		nt.n.pl		many; variousca				ind					and  khattiya-			n					a man of the warrior caste, noblesahassāni 			adj		nt.n.pl		thousandanupabbajiṃsu.		v		aor.3.pl		they gave up worldly life and monk brahman Mahāgovinda, … , and seven hundred graduates, equal (numbers) wifes, and many nobles, …,  they gave up worldly life18. DN-a 2anuruddhatthero pana vassasatañceva paṇṇāsañca vassāni, bākulatthero vassasatañceva saṭṭhi ca vassāni.anuruddhathero 		n		m.n.s			an elder Anuruddhapana 				ind					and; yet; but; moreovervassa-			n		m			yearsatañ-			adj					hundredce-				ind					andeva- 				ind					only, even, justpaṇṇāsañ-			adj					fiftyca 				ind					andvassāni, 			n		nt.n.pl		yearsbākulathero 		n		m.n.s			an elder Bakkulavassa-			n		m			yearsatañ-			adj					hundredce-				ind					ifeva- 				ind					only, even, just saṭṭhi 			adj		f,n.s			sixtyca 				ind					and vassāni.			n		nt.n.pl		yearsan elder Anuruddha (lived) hundred and fifty years, an elder Bakkula (lived) hundred and sixty years
 Examples 91.  KN-a Dhp, 4,8“na sakkā seṭṭhinā amhākaṃ ciraṃ posanaṃ nāma kātuṃ, dāni dārikāya gamanakālaṃ jānātū”ti. “na 				ind		neg			notsakkā 			ind					it is possibleseṭṭhinā 			n		m.ins.s		by bankeramhākaṃ 			pn		1.dat.pl		to usciraṃ 			ind					 (for) a long time.posanaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		support; nourishing; feedingnāma 			ind					indeedkātuṃ, 			v		inf			to dodāni 				ind					nowdārikāya 			n		f.gen.s		of girl, daughtergamana-			adj					going; walk; journey; pursuit.kālaṃ			n		m.ac.s		timejānātū”ti. 			v		imp.3.s		should know; find out; be awareindeed it is not possible by banker to do for us support for a long time, now he should find out journey time of the daughter. 2. DHP 101  		 sahassamapi ce gāthā, anatthapadasaṃhitā.ekaṃ gāthāpadaṃ seyyo, yaṃ sutvā upasammati. sahassaṃ-			adj		nt.n.s			thousandapi 				ind					and; even; and thence 				ind					ifgāthā, 			n		f.n.s			verse, stanza, line of poetryanattha-			n					harm, misfortune, damage, injury, 										hurtpada-				n					word, verse (or a quarter of a 										verse), stanza, line, sentence		saṃhitā.			pp		f.n.s			connected (with), concerning, 										havingeven than thousand verses, having harmful words,ekaṃ 			adj		m.ac.s		onegāthāpadaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		a line of a stanzaseyyo, 			ind					it is betteryaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s		that whichsutvā 			v		abs			having heardupasammati. 		v.pass	pr.3.s			calms; ceases; appeasesbetter one line of a stanza, having heard which one is calms. 3. godattattheragāthā (KN 8.245)   	dummedhehi pasaṃsā ca, viññūhi garahā ca yā.garahāva seyyo viññūhi, yaṃ ce bālappasaṃsanā.dummedhehi 		adj		m.ins.pl		by foolishpasaṃsā 			n		f.n.s			praise, applauseca,				ind					and viññūhi 			adj		m.ins.pl		by intelligent, learned, wisegarahā 			n		f.n.s			blame, reproachca				ind					and 		yā.				pn		f.n.s			whatever, that whichwhatever praise from foolish and blame from the wisegarahā’va			n		f.n.s			even blame, reproachseyyo  			ind					it is betterviññūhi, 			adj		m.ins.pl		by intelligent, learned, wiseyaṃ 				pn		f.ac.s			whatever, that which			?ce 				ind					but, than				bāla-				n					ignorant, foolishpasaṃsanā.		n		nt.abl.s		with praising, commendation		whatever blame from the wise is even better, than foolish commendation.4. DHP 322 	 varamassatarā dantā, ājānīyā ca sindhavā.kuñjarā ca mahānāgā, attadanto tato varaṃ. varaṃ-			adj					 excellent; nobleassatarā 			n		m.n.pl		mulesdantā, 			adj		m.n.pl		tamed; trainedājānīyā 			adj		m.n.pl		of good breed, thoroughbred, ca 				ind					andsindhavā.			n		m.n.pl		Sindh horses, belonging to the 										Sindhtamed mules are excellent and thoroughbred Sindh horseskuñjarā 			n		m.n.pl		elephantsca 				ind					and mahānāgā, 		n		m.n.pl		big elephants, mighty beastsattadanto 			adj		m.n.s			self-restrainedtato 				ind					from there, from that, thenvaraṃ. 			ind					betterelephants and mighty beasts, better than this is self-restrained (person)5. KN-a Ja 1,1,4kataññunā me bhavituṃ vaṭṭatī”ti ekaṃ satasahassaṃ gāhāpetvā cūḷaseṭṭhissa samīpaṃ gato.kataññunā 			adj		m.ins.s		with grateful; obliging			me 				pn		1.dat.s		to mebhavituṃ 			v		inf			to become; to exist, to bevaṭṭatī”ti 			v		pr.3.s			behoves; to be right, fit, or properekaṃ 			adj		nt.ac.s		onesatasahassaṃ 		adj		nt.ac.s		hundred thousandgāhāpetvā 			v		abs			having caused to takecūḷa-				adj					small, minorseṭṭhissa 			n		m.dat.s		bankersamīpaṃ 			ind					near togato.				pp		m.n.s			gone; moved; walked; passed; arrived at;“it is proper for me to be grateful”, having caused to take one hundred thousand  gone near to minor banker.6. SN 8.1	 taṃ kutettha labbhā, yaṃ me paro anabhiratiṃ vinodetvā abhiratiṃ uppādeyya. yaṃnūnāhaṃ attanāva attano anabhiratiṃ vinodetvā abhiratiṃ uppādeyyan”ti.taṃ 				pn		m.ac.s		that, himkuto-				ind					from where? whence?  how? how 										much less ..., let alone ....ettha 				ind					here, in this place, in this regardlabbhā			ind					possible; allowable; may be obtained	yaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s		whatever, that whichme 				pn		1.dat.s		to meparo 				adj		m.n.s			another	anabhiratiṃ 		n		f.ac.s			not delighting in, dissatisfaction, 										discontentvinodetvā 			v		abs			having dispelled; having removed; 										having driven out.abhiratiṃ 			n		f.ac.s			delight; contentmentuppādeyya. 		v		opt.3.s		could produce; make; give rise to. yaṃnūnāhaṃ 		ind					what if Iattanā-			n		m.ins.s		with selfeva 				ind					justattano 			n		dat			for self, for oneself, to oneselfanabhiratiṃ 		n		f.ac.s			not delighting in, dissatisfaction, vinodetvā  			v		abs			having dispelled; having removed;abhiratiṃ  			n		f.ac.s			delight; contentmentuppādeyyan”ti.		v		opt.refl.1.s		I could produce by myselfhow here this is possible, that another to me having removed dissatisfaction could produces contentment? what if I just with myself for self having removed  dissatisfaction could produce by myself contentment.7. SN 22.81atha kho bhagavā  … sāmaṃ senāsanaṃ saṃsāmetvā pattacīvaramādāya … eko adutiyo cārikaṃ pakkāmi. atha kho 			ind					and thenbhagavā 			n		m.n.s			Sublime One, Blessed One, 											Fortunate One, Buddhasāmaṃ 			ind					oneself, by oneself, for oneselfsenāsanaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s		sleeping and sitting, bed & chair, 										dwelling, lodgingsaṃsāmetvā 		v		abs			having set in order.pattacīvaram-		n					bowl and robeādāya 			v		abs			takingeko				adj		m.n.s			along 				adutiyo 			adj		m.n.s			without a companioncārikaṃ			n		f.ac.s			journey; wandering. pakkāmi. 			v		aor.3.s		went away , left, set off 		and then the Buddha …  having set in order lodging for oneself, taking bowl and robe, … went away to wandering without a companion, along.8. KN-a Dhp,24,11rājā satthu vacanaṃ sutvā “aho, bhante, bhāriyaṃ kammaṃ, ettake nāma bhoge vijjamāne neva attanā paribhuñji, na … puññakammaṃ akāsī”ti āharājā 				n		m.n.s			kingsatthu 			n		m.gen.s		of teacher; master, the Buddha.vacanaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		speaking, utterance, word	sutvā 			v		abs			having heard.aho, 				ind					oh!bhante, 			n		m.voc.s		Venerable Sirbhāriyaṃ 			adj		nt.ac.s		weighty, grave, seriouskammaṃ, 			n		nt.ac.s		action, deed, doingettake 			adj		loc.s			when existing this much; so muchnāma 			ind					indeedbhoge			n		m.ac.pl		when existingpossession, wealth vijjamāne 			pr.p		m.loc.s		when existingneva 				ind					neitherattanā 			n		ins			with oneself, by oneselfparibhuñji, 			v		aor.3.s		ate; used; enjoyed.na 				ind					notpuññakammaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s		meritorious action.akāsī”ti 			v		aor.3.s		did, made, or performed.āha				v		perf.3.s		he had saidking  having heard  utterance of the Teacher, had said: “Oh, Venerable Sir, serious deed, indeed when having so much wealth, he neither not enjoyed by oneself, not performed meritorious action!”9. DN 16.21	   taṃ kutettha, ānanda, labbhā, yaṃ taṃ jātaṃ bhūtaṃ saṅkhataṃ palokadhammaṃ, taṃ vata mā palujjītitaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s		that, hekuto-				ind					from where? whence?  how? how 										much less ..., let alone ....ettha, 			ind					here, in this place, in this regardānanda, 			n		voc			Ānandalabbhā, 			ind					possible; allowable;yaṃ				pn		nt.n.s			whatever, that which taṃ 				pn		nt.n.s			that, hejātaṃ 			pp		nt.n.s			bornbhūtaṃ 			pp		nt.n.s			become, bornsaṅkhataṃ			pp		nt.n.s			created, constructed, fabricated, put 									together paloka-			n					breaking off or in two, dissolution, 										decay dhammaṃ			adj		nt.n.s			having naturetaṃ  				pn		nt.n.s			that, hevata 				ind					surely, certainly, indeedmā 				ind					not, do not, let us hope not, may notpalujji				v		aor.3.s		fell down; crumbled; dissolved.how here this is possible, Ānanda, that  whatever that was born, was  become, was constructed, have nature of dissolution, that indeed :“may not be dissolved”?10. AN 3.164-183attanā ca pāṇātipātī hoti, parañca pāṇātipāte samādapeti, pāṇātipāte ca samanuñño hoti.attanā 			n		m.ins.s		with himself, by selfca 				ind					andpāṇātipātī 			adj		m.n.s			killer of living beingshoti, 				v		pr.3.s			he is		parañ’ca 			adj		m.ac.s		and anotherpāṇātipāte 			n		m.loc.s		in killing living beingssamādapeti, 		v		pr.3.s			instigatepāṇātipāte 			n		m.loc.s		in killing living beingsca 				ind					andsamanuñño 		adj		m.n.s			approvinghoti.				v		pr.3.s			he is	by himself he is a killer of living beings, and he instigate another for killing living beings, and he is approving killing living beings.11. (SN 12.41)			 so ākaṅkhamāno attanāva attānaṃ byākareyya — ‘khīṇanirayomhi khīṇatiracchānayoni khīṇapettivisayo khīṇāpāyaduggativinipāto, sotāpannohamasmi avinipātadhammo niyato sambodhiparāyaṇo’”ti. so 				pn		m.n.s			he, thatākaṅkhamāno 		pr.p		m.n.s			wishing, desiringattanā-			n		m.ins.s		with oneself, by oneselfeva				ind					just, even, also		 attānaṃ 			n		m.acc.s		self, himself, herself, itself, yourself, 									oneself (object)byākareyya 		v		opt.3.s		could explain, defines‘khīṇanirayo-		adj		m.n.s			one who is beyond the hell.amhi 				v		pr.1.s			I amniyato 			adj		m.n.s			certain, of fixed destiny, 											unavoidable, lit. controlledsambodhi-			n					full awakening, enlightenmentparāyaṇo’”ti. 		adj		m.n.s			aiming at; ending in; destined to; 										finding one's support in.wishing, just by onself he could explain to onself: “I am the one who is beyond the hell … unavoidable destined to enlightenment.”12. SN-a 1,6,1,10“kathaṃ hi nāma attanā agaṇhantā mayhampi adāpetvā pakkamissantī””ti“kathaṃ 			ind					how? why?hi 				ind					indeednāma 			ind					certainly, truly, for sureattanā 			n		m.ins.s		with oneself, by oneselfagaṇhantā 			pr.p		m.n.pl		not takingmayhaṃ-			pn		1.dat.s		to meapi 				ind					just, only			adāpetvā 			v		abs			having not caused to give (to)pakkamissantī””ti		v		fut.3.pl		will step forward; go awayhow indeed not taking by themselves, having not caused to give to me, they will goe away?13. KN-a Dhp, 4,12“amhākaṃ gehaṃ paviṭṭhānaṃ ayyānaṃ vattaṃ ñatvā nisīdituṃ vaṭṭatī”ti.“amhākaṃ 			pn		1.gen.pl		ourgehaṃ 			n		m.ac.s		house, dwellingpaviṭṭhānaṃ 		pp		m.gen.pl		entered, gone into (acc.), visitedayyānaṃ 			n		m.gen.pl		when masters, nobles, gentlemansvattaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		custom, regulationñatvā 			v		abs			having known; having found out.nisīdituṃ 			v		inf			to sit, to sit downvaṭṭatī”ti.			v		pr.3.s			behoves, to be right, fit, or properwhen gentlemans entered our house, having found out the regulation, it is suitable to sit down.14. KN-a Dhp,  1.3.2 	 “āvuso, amhehi pamādacāraṃ carituṃ na vaṭṭati… buddhā ca nāma padānupadikaṃ vicarantenāpi saṭhena ārādhetuṃ na sakkā, yathājjhāsayeneva ārādhetuṃ sakkā,“āvuso, 			n		m.voc.s		friend, brotheramhehi 			pn		1.ins.pl		by us, with uspamāda-			adj					carelessness, negligence, 											indolence, remissnesscāraṃ 			n		m.ac.s		behaviour, mannercarituṃ 			v		inf			to act, to behavena 				ind					notvaṭṭati			v		pr.3.s			behoves, to be right, fit, or properbuddhā 			n		m.abl.s		from the Buddhaca 				ind					andnāma 								indeedpadānupadikaṃ		ind					following closely in the footstepsvicarantena-		pr.p		m.ins.s		by going about; wanderingapi 				ind					just, only, even	saṭhena			adj		m.ins.s		crafty, fraudulentārādhetuṃ 			v		inf			to  invites; pleases; wins favour; 										obtains. na				ind					notsakkā, 			ind					it is possibleyathājjhāsayena-		adj		m.ins.s		with straight in mind; faithfuleva 				ind					only, just, so, evenārādhetuṃ		 	v		inf			to  invites; pleases; wins favour; 										obtains. sakkā, 			ind					it is possiblefriend, it is not suitable to us  negligence in behaviour, indeed it is not possible for by wandering fraudulent to wins favour from the Buddha, even following (his) footsteps, only for those who straight in mind it is possible to win favour.15. SN 3.11āpadāsu kho, mahārāja, thāmo veditabbo. so ca kho dīghena addhunā, na ittaraṃ; manasikarotā, no amanasikarotā; paññavatā, no duppaññena.āpadāsu 			n		m.loc.pl		in misfortunes; distresses; 											calamitieskho, 				ind					indeedmahārāja, 			n		m.voc.s		o grate king!thāmo 			n		m.n.s			strength, power; ability; firmness.veditabbo. 			pt.p		m.n.s			can be known, should be 											understood, must be experiencedso 				pn		m.n.s			he, thatca 				ind					andkho 	 			ind					indeeddīghena 			adj		m.ins.s		by longaddhunā			n		m.ins.s		by timena 				ind					notittaraṃ; 			ind					for a short time; brieflymanasikarotā, 		pp		m.ins.s		by paying attentionno 				ind					not				amanasikarotā; 		pp		m.ins.s		by not paying attentionpaññavatā, 		adj		m.ins.s		by possessed of insight, wise, 										intelligent	no 				ind					notduppaññena.		adj		m.ins.s		by foolisho grate king! in misfortunes strength can be known. And that indeed with long time, not for a short time. With paying attention, not with not paying attention. By the wise, not by the foolish.16. KN-a Ja 1,7,10paṭhamaṃ attanā pabbajitvā pacchā parisaṃ pabbājetvā assamapadaṃ bhājetvā adāsi.paṭhamaṃ 			ind					at first; for the first time.attanā 			n		m.ins.s		by onself, with selfpabbajitvā 			v		abs			having gone forth; having become a 									monk; having leaved household life.pacchā 			ind					behind, aft, after, afterwards, back; 									westwardparisaṃ			n		m.ac.s		assemblypabbājetvā 		v		abs			having caused to ordainassamapadaṃ		n		m.ac.s		ashram, monastery, hermitage bhājetvā 			v		abs			having divided; having distributed.adāsi.			v		aor.3.s		gaveat first  having become a monk by onself, after having caused to ordain assembly, having divided monastery, he gave.
 Examples 101. KN-a Dhp,1,4“amma, mā evaṃ vadetha, ahaṃ yāvajīvaṃ tumhe paṭijaggissāmī”ti.“amma, 			n		f.voc.s		dear mothermā 				ind					do notevaṃ 			ind					so in this way; in such a way; like 										this.vadetha,			v		imp.2.pl		you speak ahaṃ 			pn		1.n.s			I			yāvajīvaṃ 			ind					for whole life, lit. as long as lifetumhe 			pn		2.acc.pl		youpaṭijaggissāmī”ti.		v		fut.1.s		I will look after, take care dear, do not say like this,  for whole life I will  look after you2. (SN 10.7)tuṇhī uttarike hohi, tuṇhī hohi punabbasu.yāvāhaṃ buddhaseṭṭhassa, dhammaṃ sossāmi satthuno. tuṇhī 				ind					silent, silence, silentlyuttarike 			n		m.voc.s		Uttarikehohi, 				v		imp.2.s		you should be		tuṇhī 				ind					silent, silence, silentlyhohi 				v		imp.2.s		you should be		punabbasu.		n		m.voc.s		Punabbasuyāva-				ind					as long as, as far as, up to, untilahaṃ 			pn		1.n.s			Ibuddha-			n					Buddha, Awakened Oneseṭṭhassa, 			adj		m.gen.s		of foremost, best, primary, most 										importantdhammaṃ 			n		m.ac.s		Teachingsossāmi 			v		fut.1.s		I  will listen, will hearsatthuno. 			n		m.gen.s		of the teacher, of the masterUttarike, you should be silent, Punabbasu you should be silent, until I will listen Teaching of the master, of the foremost Awakened One.3. (KN 8.97)	 “hitvā satapalaṃ kaṃsaṃ, sovaṇṇaṃ satarājikaṃ.aggahiṃ mattikāpattaṃ, idaṃ dutiyābhisecanan”ti. “hitvā 			v		abs			having left, having left behind, 										having abandonedsata-palaṃ 		adj		nt.ac.s		hundred weight, measure of metalkaṃsaṃ, 			n		m.ac.s		bronze plate, bowlsovaṇṇaṃ 			n		nt			goldsata-rājikaṃ.		adj		nt.ac.s		hundred weight, grain (of gold)aggahiṃ 			v		aor.1.s		I tookmattikā-pattaṃ, 		n		nt.ac.s		clay bowlidaṃ 				pn		nt.n.s			thisdutiya-			adj					second (2nd)ābhisecanan”ti. 		n		nt.n.s			consecration; ablutionhaving left bronze bowl hundred weighte metal, hundred weight gold, I took clay bowl, this is the second consecration. 4. DN 16.40assosuṃ kho pāveyyakā mallā — “bhagavā kira kusinārāyaṃ parinibbuto”ti.assosuṃ 			v		aor.3.pl		they heard		kho 				ind					indeed, surely, certainlypāveyyakā 			n		m.n.pl		Pāveyyakasmallā — 			n		m.n.pl		Mallas“bhagavā 			n		m.n.s			the Sublime One, Blessed One, 										Fortunate One, Buddhakira 				ind					it is said, allegedly, apparently, 										people saykusinārāyaṃ 		n		f.loc.s		in Kusinara, a city of the Mallasparinibbuto”ti.		pp		m.n.s			who is extinguished, who’s fire is 										out, pass away without being reborncertainly Pāveyyakas Mallas heard: “people say, the Blessed One was extinguished in Kusinara.”5. SN 17.8assuttha no tumhe, bhikkhave, rattiyā paccūsasamayaṃ jarasiṅgālassa vassamānassā”ti? assuttha 			v		aor.2.pl		you all heardno 				ind					surely? didn’t you? definitely		tumhe, 			pn		1.n.pl			you all, youbhikkhave, 			n		m.voc.pl		o monksrattiyā 			n		f.loc.s		at nightpaccūsasamayaṃ 	ind					before dawn, early in the morningjarasiṅgālassa 		n		m.gen.s (abs)	when old jackal				vassamānassā”ti? 	prp		m.gen.s (abs)	when animal crying, howling, 										roaringo monks, didn’t you heard early in the morning, at night when roaring old jackal?6. Vin 4, 1.13assosi kho rājā māgadho seniyo bimbisāro — samaṇo khalu bho gotamo sakyaputto sakyakulā pabbajito rājagahaṃ anuppattoassosi 			v		aor.3.s		heardkho 				ind					indeedrājā 				n		m.n.s			kingmāgadho 			adj		m.n.s			of Magadhaseniyo 			n		m.n.s			Seniya, generalbimbisāro 			n		m.n.s			Bimbisārasamaṇo 			n		m.n.s			ascetic, renunciant, holy man, 										monk, reclusekhalu 			ind					indeed, surelybho 				n		m.n.s			sir, master, friendgotamo 			n		m.n.s			Gotamasakyaputto 			adj		m.n.s			son of the Sakyansakyakulā 			n		m.abl.s		from the Sakyan familypabbajito 			adj		m.n.s			gone forth, renouncedrājagahaṃ 			n		m.ac.s		a city, the capital of Māgadha.anuppatto			pp		m.n.s			reached, arrived, attainedGeneral Bimbisāra, king of Magadha, indeed heard: recluse master Gotama, son of the Sakyan, who gone forth from the Sakyan family,  arrived in Rājagaha.7. DN 16“alaṃ, āvuso, mā socittha, mā paridevittha, sumuttā mayaṃ tena mahāsamaṇena.“alaṃ, 			ind					enoughāvuso,			n		m.voc.pl		brothers, friendsmā 				ind					do notsocittha, 			v		aor.2.pl		grieved, were sadmā  				ind					do notparidevittha, 		v		aor.2.pl		mourned, lamented, wailedsumuttā 			adj		m.n.pl		well free (of), well releasedmayaṃ 			n		1.n.pl			(royal) wetena 				ind					thereby, because of that, on that 										accountmahāsamaṇena.		n		m.ins.s		by great asceticenough, brothers, do not  grieve! do not  lament! Thereby we are well released from great ascetic. 												?8. Vin 4, 1.63“suṇasi, itthannāma, ayaṃ te saccakālo bhūtakālo. yaṃ jātaṃ taṃ saṅghamajjhe pucchante santaṃ atthīti vattabbaṃ, asantaṃ natthī”ti vattabbaṃ. mā kho vitthāyi, mā kho maṅku ahosi.“suṇasi, 			v		pr.2.s			you listenitthannāma, 		n		m.voc.s		of such and such a name	ayaṃ 			pn		m.n.s			thiste 				pn		2.dat.s		for you						saccakālo 			n		m.n.s			time to tell the truth, lit. truth timebhūtakālo			n		m.n.s			time to be real, time to be matter of 									fact, time to reveal one's true 										natureyaṃ 				pn		m.n.s			whateverjātaṃ				pp		m.n.s			has been born, happened, occurred taṃ 				pn		m.n.s			thatsaṅghamajjhe 		ind					in the midst the community, among 									the communitypucchante	prp			m.loc.s		when asking, enquiring, questioning	santaṃ 			pr.p		nt.n.s			existing, being, there isatthī’ti 			v		pr.3.s			there is, there existsvattabbaṃ, 		ptp		nt.n.s			should be said, should be toldasantaṃ 			pr.p		nt.n.s			not existing, being, there isnatthī”ti 			v		pr.3.s			there is not, there not existsvattabbaṃ. 		ptp		nt.n.s			should be said, should be told. mā 				ind					do notkho 				ind					indeedvitthāyi, 			v		aor.3.s		froze, hesitated, lit. became stiffmā  				ind					do not	kho 				ind					indeed maṅku 			adj		m.n.s			confused, downcast, in low spirits		ahosi.			v		aor.3.s		was, existed, became(of such and such a name), you listen! this is time for you to tell the truth, time to reveal true nature. Whatever happened, in the midst the community when asked, if existing: “it is” should be said or if not existing “it is not”  should be said. indeed do not  hesitate, do not being confused.			     			9.  (KN 8.224)yuvāsi tvaṃ pabbajito, tiṭṭhāhi mama sāsane.bhuñja mānusake kāme, ahaṃ vittaṃ dadāmi te. yuva-				adj		m.n.s		youngāsi 				v		aor.2.s	you weretvaṃ 				pn		2.n.s		youpabbajito,			pp		m.n.s		ordained, renouncedtiṭṭhāhi 			v		imp.2.s	you stay (in), live (in)mama			pn		1.gen.s	my sāsane.			n		m.loc.s	in teachings, instructionbhuñja 			v		imp.2.s	you use, enjoymānusake 			adj		m.ac.pl	humankāme, 			n		m.ac.pl	pleasures, sensual pleasuresahaṃ 			pn		1.n.s		Ivittaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s	property, wealth, possessiondadāmi 			v		pr.1.s		I give		te. 				pn		2.dat.s	to youyou were ordained young, follow my instruction, enjoy human sensual pleasures, I give you wealth.  10. DN 16.32	 “alaṃ, ānanda, mā soci mā paridevi, nanu etaṃ, ānanda, mayā paṭikacceva akkhātaṃ — ‘sabbeheva piyehi manāpehi nānābhāvo vinābhāvo aññathābhāvo’;“alaṃ, 			ind				enoughānanda, 			n		m.voc.s	Ānandamā 				ind				do notsoci 				v		aor.3.s	mourned; grieved.mā 				ind				do not paridevi, 			v		aor.3.s	wailed; lamented.nanu 				ind				surely? would? wouldn’t?etaṃ, 			pn		m.ac.s	thisānanda,			n		m.voc.s	Ānanda mayā 			pn		1.ins.s	by mepaṭikacca’			ind				early, previouslyeva				ind				just, even akkhātaṃ — 		v		aor.refl.1.s	I myself spoke, addressed, declared‘sabbehi-			adj		m.abl.pl	from all			eva				ind				just  piyehi 			adj		m.abl.pl	from dear, belovedmanāpehi 			adj		m.abl.pl	pleasant, likeable, attractive, agreeablenānābhāvo 		pp		m.n.s		become distinctvinābhāvo 			pp		m.n.s		become withoutaññathābhāvo’;		pp		m.n.s		becoming different; change, alterationenough Ānanda! do not grieve! do not lament! wouldn’s this even early declared by me: “ just from all dear and likeable (one will) become distinct, become without, becoming different”?11. KN-a Dhp,25,5susaññatānañhi vaco nisamma, gajuttamo sabbaguṇesu aṭṭhā”ti.susaññatānaṃ-		adj		m.gen.pl	of self-controlled, well restrainedhi 				ind				indeedvaco 				n		nt.ac.s	speech, words, sayingnisamma, 			v		ger		attending to, listening to, observinggaj-uttamo 			n		m.n.s		highest elephantsabba-			adj				all	guṇesu			n		m.loc.pl	ties; a strings			aṭṭhā”ti.			adj				eight (8), goal , meaningattending to speech of well restrained ones, highest elephant in all strings			?12. KN-a Dhp,1,1“kiṃ te aphāsukan”ti? “akkhīhi na passāmī”ti. “bhesajjaṃ te karissāmī”ti? “karohi, sāmī”ti. “kiṃ me dassasī”ti?“kiṃ 				pn		nt.n.s		who? what? which?te 				pn		2.gen.s	youraphāsukan”ti? 		n		nt.n.s		illness, trouble, discomfort, difficulty“akkhīhi 			n		nt.ins.pl	by eyes	na 				ind				notpassāmī”ti. 		v		pr.1.s		I sees“bhesajjaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	medicine, remedyte 				pn		2.dat.s	to youkarissāmī”ti? 		v		fut.1.s	I will do, make“karohi, 			v		imp.2.s	you do, makesāmī”ti. 			n		m.voc.s	master, sir“kiṃ				pn		nt.n.s		who? what? which? me 				pn		1.dat.s	to medassasī”ti?			v		fut.2.s	you will give“what is your difficulty?” “I do not see by eyes” “Shall I make medicine for you?” “May you make, sir” “What will you give to me?”13. DN 4.5tiṭṭhatu soṇadaṇḍo brāhmaṇo, tumhe mayā saddhiṃ mantavho … tiṭṭhatha tumhe, soṇadaṇḍo brāhmaṇo mayā saddhiṃ paṭimantetū”ti.tiṭṭhatu 			v		imp.3.s	let him stop, let him standsoṇadaṇḍo 		n		m.n.s		Soṇadaṇḍobrāhmaṇo, 			n		m.n.s		brahmantumhe 			pn		2.n.s		you allmayā 			pn		1.ins.s	with mesaddhiṃ 			ind				together (with), withmantavho 			v.reflex	imp.2.pl	you yourself should consult, discusse, 									take 	counseltiṭṭhatha 			v		pr.2.s		you stand, stoptumhe,  			pn		2.n.s		you allsoṇadaṇḍo 		n		m.n.s		Soṇadaṇḍobrāhmaṇo, 			n		m.n.s		brahmanmayā 			pn		1.ins.s	with mesaddhiṃ 			ind				together (with), withpaṭimantetū”ti.		v		imp.3.s	he discuss in argument, reply to, answerlet brahman Soṇadaṇḍo stop,  you all yourself should consult with me, … , you all stop, let brahman Soṇadaṇḍo answer me.14. DN 1.21yāvassa kāyo ṭhassati, tāva naṃ dakkhanti devamanussā. kāyassa bhedā uddhaṃ jīvitapariyādānā na naṃ dakkhanti devamanussā. yāva-				ind				as long as, as far as, up to, untilassa				pn		m.gen.s	hiskāyo 				n		m.n.s		bodyṭhassati, 			v		fut.3.s	will stand, will stay, will remain, will lasttāva 				ind				that much, as long as, to that extent, untilnaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	him, her, it, one, that	dakkhanti 			v		pr.3.pl	they seedevamanussā. 		n		m.n.pl	gods and menkāyassa 			n		m.gen.s	of bodybhedā 			n		m.abl.s	from breaking-up (of), breaking apart (of)uddhaṃ			ind				upwards (from), in future, ahead, hence jīvita-				n				life; span of life; lifetimepariyādānā 		n		nt.abl.s	from using up, exhaustion, consumptionna 				ind				notnaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s	him, her, it, one, that	dakkhanti 			v		pr.3.pl	they seedevamanussā. 		n		m.n.pl	gods and menas long as his body will remain, to that extent gods and men see him. hence from breaking-up of body, from using up lifetime, gods and men no (longer) see him.
 Examples 11  1. Ja 1.1.33“sammodamānā gacchanti, jālamādāya pakkhino.yadā te vivadissanti, tadā ehinti me vasan”ti.sammodamānā 	prp		m.n.pl	being friendly, being happy togethergacchanti, 		v		pr.3.pl	they go, walk, move, wander aroundjālam-		n				net, snare, entanglementādāya 		v		ger		takingpakkhino.		n		m.dat.pl	for birds, lit. with wingsyadā 			ind				when, wheneverte 			pn		m.n.pl	theyvivadissanti, 	v		fut.3.pl	will disagree, quarrel, dispute, argue, conflicttadā 			ind				then, at that timeehinti 		v		fut.3.pl	they will comeme 			pn		m.gen.s	my		vasan”ti.		n		m.ac.s	control, authority, power, masteryThey wandering around being friendly, taking a net for birds. When they will argue, then they will come under my control.2. K.N. 9.46‘ehi bhadde’ti maṃ avaca, sā me āsūpasampadā.‘ehi 			v		imp.2.s	come!bhadde’ti 		v		f.voc.s	madam, ma’am, good ladymaṃ 			pn		1.ac.s	ne		avaca, 		v		imp.3.s	he said, he toldsā 			pn		f.n.s		she, thatme			pn		1.gen.s	my					 āsu-			ind				quick, fastūpasampadā.	n		f.n.s		higher ordination as monastic“good lady, come!”, he said to me. That was my quick higher ordination as monastic.3. K.N. 12.2tattha pāyāsaṃ paggayha, nerañjaram’upehiti.tattha 		ind				there, in that place; in that regard, in that casepāyāsaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	milk rice porridge, kheerpaggayha, 		v		ger		having taken						      nerañjaram-	n				Nerañjara Riverupehiti.		v		fut.3.s	one will approach, one will arrive (at)having taken milk rice porridge in that place, he will approach Nerañjara River.4. K.N. 12.2paṭiyatta-vara-maggena, bodhimūlam-upehiti.paṭiyatta-		pp				prepared, arrangedvara-			adj				excellent, best, lit. selectmaggena,		n		m.ins.s	by road, path, trackbodhimūlam-	n				foot of the Bodhi treeupehiti.		v		fut.3.s	he will approach, he will arrive (at)he will approach the foot of the Bodhi tree, by (well) prepared, excellent path.5. S.N. 1.49sace enti manussattaṃ, dalidde jāyare kule.sace 			ind				ifenti 			v		pr.3.pl	they come, goes (to), comes (to), becomesmanussattaṃ, 	n		nt.ac.s	human existence, human statedalidde 		adj				in poor, needy, impoverishedjāyare 		v		pr.refl.3.pl	they born, come into beingkule.			n		m.loc.s	in familyif they come to human existence, they come into being in poor family.6. D.N. 14.14“alatthuṃ kho, bhikkhave, tāni caturāsītipāṇasahassāni vipassissa bhagavato arahato sammāsambuddhassa santike pabbajjaṃ,“alatthuṃ		v		aor.3.pl	they got, they obtained kho, 			ind				indeedtāni 			pn		nt.n.pl	they, thosecaturāsīti-		adj				eighty four (84)pāṇa-			n				being, living beingsahassāni 		adj		nt.n.pl	one thousand (1000)vipassissa 		n		m.gen.s	of insightful one, Vipassī Buddhabhagavato 		n		m.gen.s	of the Buddhaarahato 		n		m.gen.s	of enlightened being, lit. worthy onesammāsambuddhassa 	n	m.gen.s	of perfectly awakened one, fully 										enlightened beingsantike 		ind				to, in the presence (of), near (to), nearby, close 								(to), on the verge (of)pabbajjaṃ,		n		f.ac.s		(vinaya) ordination, renunciation, 											becoming a monasticindeed those  eighty four  thousand living beings got ordination in the presence of enlightened, perfectly awakened one, Vipassī Buddha.7. Vin-a 1,brāhmaṇo … paṭipathe theraṃ disvā, “bho pabbajita, amhākaṃ gehaṃ agamitthā”ti āha. “āma, brāhmaṇa, agamimhā”ti. “api kiñci labhitthā”ti? “āma, brāhmaṇa, labhimhā”ti. brāhmaṇo		n		m.n.s		Brahmanpaṭipathe 		n		m.loc.s	in way back, opposite directiontheraṃ		n		m.ac.s	elder, senior monk disvā,		v		abs		having seen, having understood, having foundbho 			n		m.voc.s	o sir, master, friend, good man, you pabbajita, 		n		m.voc.s	o monk, monastic, renunciantamhākaṃ 		pn		1.gen.pl 	our, of usgehaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	house, dwellingagamitthā”ti 	v		aor.2.pl	you all wentāha. 			v		perf.3.s	he had saidāma, 			ind				yes, certainlybrāhmaṇa,		n		m.voc.s	o Brahman agamimhā”ti. 	v		aor.1.pl	we went“api 			ind		interrog	have? did? was?kiñci 			ind				something, anythinglabhitthā”ti? 	v		aor.2.pl	you all got, obtained“āma, 		ind				yes, certainlybrāhmaṇa,		n		m.voc.s	o Brahman labhimhā”ti. 	v		aor.1.pl	we got, obtainedBrahman having seen a senior monk on the way back, he said: “O Venerable monk, you went to our house.”; “Yes, Brahman, we went.”; “Did you get anything?”; “Yes, Brahman, we got.”8. Vin-a 1rājā sumanaṃ upasaṅkamitvā pucchi — “kuto dāni, bhante, dhātuyo lacchāmā”ti?rājā 			n		m.n.s		kingsumanaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	Sumana, ‘glad, happy’upasaṅkamitvā 	v		abs		having approached, having gone (to), having 									drawn near (to)pucchi 		v		aor.3.s	asked, enquired, questioned“kuto 			ind				from where?, where?dāni, 			ind				now, immediatelybhante, 		n		voc.s		sir, lord, reverenddhātuyo 		n		m.ac.pl	relics (of the Buddha or arahant)lacchāmā”ti?	v		fut.1.pl	we will get, will obtainHaving approached  Sumana, king asked: “Now, Sir, where we will get relics?”9. Vin-a 1,“tvaṃ, mahārāja, vīthiyo sodhāpetvā ... uposathaṃ samādiyitvā ... sāyanhasamaye mahānāgavanuyyānābhimukho yāhi. addhā tasmiṃ ṭhāne dhātuyo lacchasī”ti.“tvaṃ, 		pn		m.n.s		youmahārāja, 		n		m.voc.s	great king, supreme rulervīthiyo 		n		f.ac.pl	streetssodhāpetvā  	v		abs		having caused to cleanuposathaṃ 	n		m.ac.s	full moon or new moon observance daysamādiyitvā  	v		abs		having undertakensāyanhasamaye 	n		m.loc.s	in the latter part of the afternoon; everning; 									after-noon.mahānāgavana-		n			Mahānāgavanauyyāna-		n				park, pleasure grove, lit. walk outabhimukho 	adj		m.n.s		facing the entrance, being in front				     yāhi			v		imp.2.s	you go, traveladdhā 		ind				certainly, surelytasmiṃ 		pn		m.loc.s	in thatṭhāne 		n		nt.loc.s	in placedhātuyo 		n		f.ac.pl	relics (of the Buddha or arahant)lacchasī”ti.		v		pr.2.s		you will getO great king, after causing to clean streets, after undertaking observance day, in the after-noon go towards the entrance of Mahānāgavana park. In that place certainly you will get relics.10. K.N. 10.27alatthaṃ paramaṃ pītiṃ, disvā dantaṃ jutindharaṃ.alatthaṃ 		v		aor.1.s	I got, I obtainedparamaṃ 		adj		f.ac.s		very highest, very worst, ultimate, superior, 									sublime, most extremepītiṃ, 		n		f.ac.s		delight, joy, rapture, blissdisvā 		v		abs		having seen, having understood, having founddantaṃ 		adj		m.ac.s	tamed, trained, restrainedjutindharaṃ.	n		m.ac.s	brilliant, JutindharaHaving seen restrained Jutindhara, I got superior delight.11. K.N. 10.539anāgatamhi addhāne, lacchase taṃ manorathaṃ.anāgatamhi 	adj		nt.loc.s	in not come, futureaddhāne, 		n		nt.loc.s	in timelacchase 		v.reflex	fut.2.s	you yourself will gettaṃ			pn		m.ac.s	that manorathaṃ.	n		m.ac.s	heart’s desire, object of desire, wishIn the future you will get that (your) wish.12. K.N. 6.32patīsu dhammaṃ pacaritva sabbā, lacchāmase bhāsati yaṃ ayaṃ latā.patīsu 		m		m.loc.pl	on husbandsdhammaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	the Teachingpacaritva		v		abs		having practised, having behaved in a certain 									mannersabbā, 		pn		f.n.s		alllacchāmase 	v.reflex	imp.2.s	will should get, may we obtainbhāsati 		v		pr.3.s		speaks (about), talks (about)yaṃ 			pn		m.ac.s	that whichayaṃ 		pn		f.n.s		this, shelatā.			n		f.n.s		epitet of greed, Latā				having practised the Teaching on (our) husbands, may we obtain that, what this Latā speaks.13. D.N. 14.10atha kho, bhikkhave, vipassissa bodhisattassa rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādi atha kho, 		ind				then, and then, after thatvipassissa 		n		m.gen.s	of insightful one, Vipassī Buddha bodhisattassa 	n		m.gen.s	of Buddha-to-berahogatassa 	adj		m.gen.s	when gone into seclusion, gone to lonely place.paṭisallīnassa 	pp		m.gen.s	when secluded, retired, gone into solitude 									abstracted, plunged in meditation, separatedevaṃ 		ind				thus, this, like this, just as, suchcetaso 		n		m.dat.s	to mindparivitakko 		n		m.n.s		reflection, contemplation, train of thoughtudapādi 		v		aor.3.s	arose, sprung upAnd then this reflection arose in the mind of Vipassī, Buddha-to-be, when he gone into seclusion and was retired.14. D.N. 14.1ito so, bhikkhave, ekanavute kappe yaṃ vipassī bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho loke udapādi.ito 			ind				from here (time), from now, agoso, 			pn		m.n.s		that, itekanavute 		adj		m.loc.s	in 91stkappe		n		m.loc.s	kaplas, aeonsyaṃ 			pn		m.ac.s	that whichvipassī 		n		m.nom.s	insightful one, Vipassī Buddhabhagavā 		n		m.nom.s	the Buddhaarahaṃ 		n		m.nom.s	enlightened being, lit. worthy onesammāsambuddho 	n	m.nom.s	perfectly awakened one, fully enlightened beingloke 			n		m.loc.s	in the worldudapādi.		v		aor.3.s	arose, sprung upIt was 91 aeons ago, that the Vipassī Buddha, worthy one, perfectly awakened one,  arose in the world.15. K.N. 10.8accayena ahorattaṃ, padumuttara-nāmakosabbaṃ tamaṃ vinodetvā, loke uppajji cakkhumā.accayena 		ind				after the passing, after the lapse 			      ahorattaṃ, 		n		nt.ac.s	day and nightpadumuttara-	n				name of a Buddha, Ultimate Lotusnāmako 		adj		m.n.s		by the name of, calledsabbaṃ 		adj		m.ac.s	alltamaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	darkness, ignorancevinodetvā, 		v		abs		having dispelled, having driven out, having removedloke 			n		m.loc.s	in the worlduppajji 		v		aor.3.s	appeared, arose, was born, took placecakkhumā.		n		m.n.s		One who possesing a visionAfter the passing day and night, Buddha Ultimate Lotus having removed all ignorance, and the One who possesing a vision arose in the world.16. K.N. 10.12sucārurūpaṃ disvāna, vitti me udapajjatha.sucārurūpaṃ 	adj		m.ac.s	handsome appearance, beautiful formdisvāna, 		v		abs		having seenvitti 			n		f.n.s		joy, happiness, pleasure, lit. gainme 			pn		1.dat.s	for meudapajjatha.	v.reflex	imperf.3.s	it came, aroseAfter seeing the one with handsome appearance, happiness arose in me.17. Vin 4, 1.6“labheyyāma mayaṃ, bhante, bhagavato santike pabbajjaṃ, labheyyāma upasampadan”ti. “etha bhikkhavo”ti bhagavā avoca ... sāva tesaṃ āyasmantānaṃ upasampadā ahosi.“labheyyāma 	v		opt.1.pl	we could get, may we get, we wish to getmayaṃ, 		pn		1.n.s		webhante, 		n		m.voc.s	sir, lord, reverendbhagavato		n		m.gen.s	of the Buddha,  Blessed Onesantike 		ind				in the presence (of), near (to)pabbajjaṃ, 	n		m.f.s		ordination, renunciation, becoming a monasticlabheyyāma  	v		opt.1.pl	we could get, may we get, we wish to getupasampadan”ti.       n		f.ac.s		 higher ordination as monastic“etha 			v		imp.2.pl	come you all!bhikkhavo”ti 	n		m.voc.pl	o monksbhagavā 		n		m.n.s		Sublime One, Blessed One, Fortunate One, Buddhaavoca 		v		aor.3.s	saidsā-eva		pn		f.n.s		just that, this	 tesaṃ 		pn		m.gen.pl	of thoseāyasmantānaṃ 	n		m.gen.pl	of venerables, reverendsupasampadā   	n		f.n.s		higher ordination as monasticahosi.		v		aor.3.s	it was“We wish to get the ordination and the higher ordination in the presence of the Blessed One.” “Come monks!”, said the Fortunate One. Just that was the higher ordination of those venerables. 18. Vin 1, 1.2“gacch’āvuso, ahampi āgacchāmī””ti. “eyyāsi, bhante, purāhaṃ haññāmī”ti. “gaccha-		v		imp.2.s	go! āvuso, 		n		m.voc.s	friendaham-pi 		pn		1.n.s		I also	āgacchāmī””ti. 	v		pr.1.s		I come, come along“eyyāsi, 		v		opt.2.s	you should comebhante, 		n		m.voc.s	sir, lord, reverendpura-			ind				beforeahaṃ 		pn		1.n.s		Ihaññāmī”ti. 	v.pass	pr.1.s		I am hurt, killed, destroyed“Go, friend! I also come along.”; “May you come, sir, before I am killed.”19. KN 9.72na ca me hiṃsati kiñci, na cahaṃ isidāsiyā saha vacchaṃ. na 			ind				notca 			ind				andme			pn		1.dat.s	to me hiṃsati 		v		pr.3.s		harms, hurts, injures, troubleskiñci, 			ind				something, anythingna 			ind				notca-ahaṃ		pn		1.n.s		but I	 isidāsiyā 		n		f.ins.s	with Isidāsisaha			ind				with vacchaṃ. 		v		fut.1.s	I will liveNothing troubles me, but I will not live with Isidāsi.20. K.N. 9.68pakkamissañca nāḷāto, kodha nāḷāya vacchatipakkamissañ’ca 		v	fut.1.s	and I will go, leavenāḷāto, 		n		f.abl.s	from Nāḷako-			pn		m.n.s		who? what? which?idha			ind				here, in this regard, in this world nāḷāya 		n		f.loc.s	in Nāḷavacchati		v		fut.3.s	will liveAnd I will leave from Nāḷa. Who will live here in Nāḷa?21. S.N. 20.8tesaṃ rājā māgadho ajātasattu vedehiputto lacchati otāraṃ lacchati ārammaṇaṃ.tesaṃ 		n		m.gen.pl	theirrājā 			n		m.n.s		kingmāgadho 		adj		m.n.s		of Magadhaajātasattu 		n		m.n.s		Ajātasattu, born enemyvedehiputto 	n		m.n.s		Vedehiputta, “son of the lady from Videha” or “son of 							the wise woman”.lacchati 		v		fut.3.s	will get, will obtainotāraṃ 		n		m.ac.s	chance, opportunity, opening, gaplacchati 		v		fut.3.s	will get, will obtain ārammaṇaṃ.	n		nt.ac.s	chance, opportunityTheir king of Magadha, Ajātasattu, son of the lady from Videha, will get chance, will get opportunity.22. Vin 4, 6.179tena kho pana samayena jānapadā manussā ... bahārāmakoṭṭhake sakaṭaparivaṭṭaṃ karitvā acchanti — yadā paṭipāṭiṃ labhissāma, tadā bhattaṃ karissāmāti.tena 			pn		m.ins.s	by thatkho pana 		ind				and now, but, and next (indeed)samayena 		n		m.ins.s	by time, occasionjānapadā 		adj		m.n.pl	from country sitemanussā		n		m.n.pl	people, human beingsbahi-			ind				externally; outsideārāmakoṭṭhake 	n		m.loc.s	gate-tower of a monastery	sakaṭa-		n				cart, wagonparivaṭṭaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	circle, roundkaritvā 		v		abs		having done, having made, having builtacchanti 		v		pr.3.pl	wait, remain, lit. sityadā 			ind				when, wheneverpaṭipāṭiṃ 		n		f.ac.s		turn (in queue)labhissāma		v		fut.1.pl	we will obtain, get		tadā 			ind				then, at that timebhattaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	food, mealkarissāmā’ti.	v		fut.1.pl	we will makeNow at that time country people having made circle of wagons outside the gate-tower of a monastery, they remain waiting : “When we get turn, then we will make food.”	 
 Examples 12  1. KN 10.40  kāye visaṃ na kamati, satthāni na ca hanti me. udakehaṃ na miyyāmi, āyāgassa idaṃ phalaṃ.   kāye 			n		m.loc.s	in body visaṃ 		n		nt.nom.s	poison, toxin, venom na 			ind				not kamati, 		v		pr.3.s		goes (into), enters (into), penetrates, has an effect satthāni 		n		nt.nom.pl	weapons, knifes, swords na 			ind				not ca 			ind				and hanti 			v		pr.3.s		hits, harms, injures me.			pn		1.dat.s	to me udake-		n		nt.loc.s	in water			 ahaṃ 		pn		1.n.s		I na 			ind				not miyyāmi, 		v		pr.1.s		I am killed, die āyāgassa 		n		m.gen.s	of gift, sacrifice, religious offering idaṃ 			pn		nt.n.s		this phalaṃ. 		n		nt.n.s		consequence, result, lit. fruitPoison is not goes into (my) body and weapons are not harm me. I am not die (sinking) in water, this is the result of religious offering.2. SN 6.12    phalaṃ ve kadaliṃ hanti, phalaṃ veḷuṃ phalaṃ naḷaṃ.phalaṃ		n		nt.n.s		fruit 	ve			ind				indeed, truly, really				kadaliṃ 		n		f.ac.s		plantain tree, banana treehanti, 		v		pr.3.s		kills, destroysphalaṃ 		n		nt.n.s		fruit veḷuṃ 		n		m.ac.s	bamboophalaṃ		n		nt.n.s		fruit  naḷaṃ.		n		m.ac.s	reed(Like) fruit destroys banana tree,  fruit (destroys) bamboo, fruit (destroys) reed.sakkāro kāpurisaṃ hanti, gabbho assatariṃ yathā”ti.sakkāro 		n		m.n.s		honour, accolade, respect, praisekāpurisaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	evil man, despicable person, worthless manhanti,			v		pr.3.s		kills, destroysgabbho 		n		m.n.s		embryoassatariṃ		n		f.ac.s		female mule yathā”ti.		ind				like, asPraise destroys worthless man, like embryo (destroys) female mule.3. DHPa 1.1.2“sovaṇṇamayo pabhassaro,uppanno rathapañjaro mama.tassa cakkayugaṃ na vindāmi,tena dukkhena jahāmi jīvitan”ti.“sovaṇṇamayo 	adj		m.n.s		golden, made of goldpabhassaro,	adj		m.n.s		radiant, shining, bright, brilliantuppanno 		adj		m.n.s		arisen, appeared, come into existencerathapañjaro 	n		m.n.s		frame of a chariot, lit. chariot ribsmama.		pn		1.dat.s	to metassa 		pn		m.dat.s	to that, to itcakkayugaṃ 	n		nt.ac.s	pair of wheelsna			ind				not vindāmi,		v		pr.1.s		I find, get, possess, hastena 			pn		m.ins.s	with thatdukkhena 		n		m.ins.s	with discomfort, suffering, pain, unease, something 								unsatisfactory, problem, troublejahāmi 		v		pr.1.s		I gives up, leaves, abandons, renouncesjīvitan”ti.		n		nt.ac.s	life, life spanGolden, radiant frame of a chariot appeared to me. I did not found pair of wheels to it. Because of this problem, I give up (my) life.4. Dhp 3  yamakavaggo 	 akkocchi maṃ avadhi maṃ, ajini maṃ ahāsi me.ye ca taṃ upanayhanti, veraṃ tesaṃ na sammati. akkocchi 		v		aor.3.s	verbally abusedmaṃ 			pn		1.ac.s	meavadhi 		v		aor.3.s	beat, struck, hurtmaṃ,  		pn		1.ac.s	meajini 			v		aor.3.s	overpowered, defeatedmaṃ 			pn		1.ac.s	meahāsi 		v		aor.3.s	robbed, stole, tookme.			pn		1.dat.s	to meye 			pn		m.n.pl	those, whoeverca 			ind				andtaṃ 			pn		m.ac.s	thatupanayhanti, 	v		pr.3.pl	holds a grudge (towards), has ill will (towards), 								lit. be bound up (with)veraṃ 		n		nt.n.s		hatred, ill-willtesaṃ		pn		m.dat.s	of him na 			ind				notsammati. 		v		pr.3.s		is calmed, is cooled“he verbally abused me, he hurt me, he defeated me, he robbed me”, whoever holds that grudge, hatred is not calmed for them .5. KN 8.236tass’āhaṃ vacanaṃ sutvā, vihāsiṃ sāsane ratotassa-		pn		m.gen.s	hisahaṃ 		pn		1.n.s		Ivacanaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	word, utterance, talk, statementsutvā, 		v		abs		having heard, having listened (to)vihāsiṃ 		v		aor.1.s	I lived, stayed insāsane 		n		nt.loc.s	in religion, monastic order, dispensationrato			pp		m.n.s		delighted (in), devoted (to), pleased (with), enjoyingHaving heard his talk, I stayed delighted in (that) monastic order.6. KN 8.262kadā nuhaṃ pabbatakandarāsu, ekākiyo addutiyo vihassaṃ. kadā 			ind				whennu’haṃ 		pn		1.n.s		I ?pabbata-		n				mountain, hillkandarāsu, 	n		m.loc.pl	in grottoes gorges, gullies, valleys, ravinesekākiyo 		adj		m.n.s 	alone, solitaryaddutiyo		adj		m.n.s 	without companion, partner, lit. second personvihassaṃ. 		v		fur.1.s	I will liveWhen I will live along, without companion, in mountain’s grottoes? 7. SN 6.14ārabhatha, nikkhamatha, yuñjatha buddhasāsane.  dhunātha maccuno senaṃ, naḷāgāraṃva kuñjaro.  yo imasmiṃ dhammavinaye, appamatto vihassati.  pahāya jātisaṃsāraṃ, dukkhassantaṃ karissati.						ārambhatha	v		imp.2.pl	begin, arouse your energy			nikkhamatha	v		imp.2.pl	leave the household life, go forth (from) 			yuñjatha		v		imp.2.pl	join (in), engage (in), participate (in)		buddhasāsane	n		nt.loc.s	in Buddha’s teaching, instruction			Arouse your energy! eave the household life! engage yourself in the Buddha’s teaching!						dhunātha		v		imp.2.pl	shake apart, remove away.			maccuno		n		m.gen.s	Māra’s			senaṃ		n		f.ac.s		army, multitude			naḷāgāraṃ		n		nt.ac.s	a hut made of reeds			va (iva)		ind				like, like as, as if			kuñjaro		n		m.n.s		elephant			Shake apart the army of Māra, like as elephant a hut made of reeds!				yo			n		m.n.s		whoever			imasmiṃ		pn		m.l.s		in this			dhammavinaye	n		m.l.s		in Teaching and Discipline			appamatto		adj		m.n.s		vigilant; careful; alert; diligent			vihassati		v		fut.3.s	will live			Whoever will live diligently in this Teaching and Discipline 						pahāya		v		abs		giving up, abandoning			jātisaṃsāraṃ	n		m.ac.s	cycle of rebirths.			dukkhassantaṃ	n		m.ac.s	end of suffering			karissati		v		fut.3.s	he will make			Abandoning the cycle of rebirths, he will make an end to suffering.		8. KN 8.179	 aniccā hi calā saddhā, evaṃ diṭṭhā hi sā mayā.rajjanti’pi virajjanti, tattha kiṃ jiyyate muni. aniccā 		adj		f.n.s		impermanent, unstable, unreliablehi 			ind				indeed, certainly, truly, definitelycalā 			adj		f.n.s		unsteady, unstable, shaky, ficklesaddhā, 		n		f.n.s		(romantic) devotion, love, lit. putting heartevaṃ 		ind				thus, this, like this, just as, suchdiṭṭhā 		pp		f.n.s		seen, foundhi 			ind				indeed, certainly, truly, definitely sā 			pn		f.n.s		she, thatmayā.		pn		m.ins.s	by merajjanti-		v		pr.3.pl	desire, love, are enamoured, are infatuated (with)api			ind				even, even thenvirajjanti, 		v		pr.3.pl	become detached, lose interest, become 									dispassionate, get boredtattha 		ind				in that regard, in that casekiṃ 			pn		m.ac.s	who? what? which?jiyyate 		v		opt.3.s	should grow old, get worn out, get tired ofmuni. 		n		m.n.s		monk, sage, seer, hermit, silent sageindeed (their) devotion is unstable and unsteady, like this that was seen by me. They love then lose interest. Why sage should get tired with that?9. KN 15.528 tasmā nābhikkhaṇaṃ gacche, na ca gacche cirāciraṃ.tasmā 		ind				therefore, that is whynābhikkhaṇaṃ		ind			not constantly, infrequently, seldom gacche, 		v		opt.3.s	could go, should walkna 			ind				notca 			ind				andgacche 		v		opt.3.s	could go, should walk cirāciraṃ.		ind				after a long time; for a long time						Therefore one should come not constantly neither after a long time.kālena yācaṃ yāceyya, evaṃ mittā na jīyare.kālena 		ind				timely, at the right moment, at a suitable time, 									at the proper timeyācaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	something asked for, almsyāceyya, 		v		opt.3.s	could ask (for), should beg (for) requestevaṃ 		ind				thus, this, like this, just as, suchmittā 			n		m.n.pl	friendsna			ind				not jīyare.		v.refl.		pr.3.spl	diminish, decrease, get lessOne should ask alms in the proper time, like this (his) friends will not decrease.10. K.N. 14.500yā kāci najjo gaṅgamabhissavanti, sabbāva tā nāmagottaṃ jahanti. yā			pn		f.n.pl		whatever kāci 			pn		f.n.pl		somenajjo			n		f.n.pl		rivers gaṅgam-		n				Gaṅga, Gangesabhissavanti, 	v		pr.3.pl	flow (into)sabbā-		adj		f.n.pl		all	eva 			ind				only, just, so, even			tā 			pn		f.n.pl		theynāmagottaṃ 	n		nt.ac.s	name and surname, name and clanjahanti. 		v		pr.3.pl	give up, leave, abandonWhatever rivers flow into the Ganges, just all they give up (their) names.11. D.N. 27.6padālatāya antarahitāya sannipatiṃsu. sannipatitvā anutthuniṃsu — ‘ahu vata no, ahāyi vata no padālatā’tipadālatāya 	n		f.gen.s	when delicious creeper, lit. foot creeper		antarahitāya 	pp		f.gen.s	when disappearedsannipatiṃsu.	v		aor.3.pl	assembled, came togethersannipatitvā 	v		abs		having gathered together, having assembled, 									having met	anutthuniṃsu	v		aor.3.pl	moaned, lamented, grieved ahu 			v		aor.1.s	it was, there wasvata 			ind				oh! oh no! oh dear!no, 			pn		1.dat.pl	for usahāyi 		V		aor.3.s	decreased, dwindled, diminished, disappearedvata 			ind				oh! oh no! oh dear!no 			pn		1.dat.pl	for uspadālatā’ti		n		f,n.s		delicious creeper, lit. foot creeperWhen delicious creeper disappeared, they assembled. Having gathered together they  grieved: “Oh! It was for us! Oh! Delicious creeper disappeared for us!”12. D.N. 14.11  ‘kicchaṃ vatāyaṃ loko āpanno, jāyati ca jīyati ca mīyati ca cavati ca upapajjati ca, atha ca pan’imassa dukkhassa nissaraṇaṃ nappajānāti jarāmaraṇassa‘kicchaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	difficulty, troublevata-			ind				indeed, trulyayaṃ 		pn		m.n.s		thisloko 			n		m.n.s		worldāpanno, 		pp		m.n.s		possessed of, filled with, lit. entered				jāyati ca 		v		pr.3.s		is born, comes into beingjīyati ca 		v		pr.3.s		grows old, gets oldmīyati ca 		v		pr.3.s		is killed, diescavati ca 		v		pr.3.s		passes away, diesupapajjati ca, 	v		pr.3.s		is reborn (in), re-arises (in)atha 			ind				then, also, and so, after that  /  but, rather, evenca  			ind				andpana			ind				moreover, and now, but	imassa 		pn		nt.gen.s	of thisdukkhassa 		n		nt.gen.s	of discomfort, suffering, pain, unease, something 								unsatisfactory, problem, troublenissaraṇaṃ 	n		nt.ac.s	escape, exit, remedynappajānāti	v		pr.3.s		does not know, does not clearly understand, 									does not distinguishjarāmaraṇassa	n		nt.gen.s	of aging and deathTruly this world filled with trouble, one comes into being, one gets old, one dies, one passes away and one re-arises, and moreover one does not distinguish the escape of this suffering, of aging and death.13. DN 18.4devā tāvatiṃsā attamanā honti pamuditā pītisomanassajātā “dibbā vata bho kāyā paripūrenti, hāyanti asurakāyā”ti.devā 			n		m.n.pl	deitiestāvatiṃsā 		n		m.n.pl	(Heaven of the) Thirty Threeattamanā 		adj		m.n.pl	pleased, happy, delighted, satisfiedhonti 			v		pr.3.pl	they arepamuditā 		pp		m.n.pl	pleased, delighted, become joyfulpīti-			n				delight, joy, rapture, blisssomanassajātā	adj		m.n.pl	state of joy “dibbā 		adj		m.n.pl	divine, heavenly, celestialvata 			ind				certainly, surely, indeedbho 			n		m.voc.s	o sir, master, friend, good man, youkāyā 			n		m.n.pl	group, multitudeparipūrenti, 	v		pr.3.pl	are filling up, are increasinghāyanti 		v		pr.3.pl	decrease, dwindle, diminishe, decline, 										disappearsasura-		n				Dark One, enemy of the devaskāyā”ti.		n		m.n.pl	group, multitudedeities of the Heaven of the Thirty Three are happy,  delighted and in state of joy and rapture: “O sir,  indeed heavenly groups are increasing, the groups of asuras are declining. ” 14. K.N. 10.47pañca uppalahatthāni, āveḷatthaṃ ahaṃsu mepañca 		adj				five (5)uppala-		n				water lilly, blue lotushatthāni, 		n		nt.ac.pl	handsāveḷa-		nt				wreath, garland (worn on the head)atthaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	purpose, use, function		ahaṃsu 		v		aor.3.pl	they carried, broughtme			pn		1.dat.s	to methey brought five hands of water lilly to me for the garland.15. K.N. 6.53dvepathamagamāsiṃ coramajjhe, te maṃ tattha vadhiṃsu bhogahetu.dvepatham-	n				crossroad, intersectionagamāsiṃ 		v		aor.1.s	I came, arrivedcora-			n				thief, robbermajjhe, 		ind				in the middle, in the midst (of)te 			pn		m.n.pl	theymaṃ 			pn		1.ac.s	metattha 		ind				there, in that placevadhiṃsu 		v		aor.3.pl	injured, killed, slaughtered, attackedbhoga-hetu.	ind				for the sake of money, for the sake of wealthI arrived in the crossroad in the middle of robbers, in that place they attacked me for the sake of wealth.16. K.N. 6.53te mayaṃ punareva laddhā mānusattaṃ, paṭipannā viharemu sīlavanto.te 			pn		nt.ac.pl	those	, they							?mayaṃ 		pn		1.n.s		wepuna-			ind				again, once moreeva 			ind				only, just, so, evenladdhā 		v		abs		having got							mānusattaṃ,	n		nt.ac.s	human state	paṭipannā 		adj		m.n.pl	practising (for), lit. following the wayviharemu 		v		opt.1.pl	we may live, we could staysīlavanto.		adj		m.n.pl	virtuous, ethical, moral, lit. possessing conductWe just again got human state, let us live practising morality.17. KN 14.18“evaṃ ce sattā jāneyyuṃ, dukkhāyaṃ jātisambhavo.na pāṇo pāṇinaṃ haññe, pāṇaghātī hi socatī”ti.“evaṃ 		ind				thus, this, like this, just as, suchce 			ind				ifsattā 			n		m.n.pl	being, living beingjāneyyuṃ, 		v		opt.3.pl	could know, understanddukkha-		n				discomfort, suffering, pain, unease, something 								unsatisfactory, problem, troubleayaṃ 		pn		m.n.s		this, this thingjātisambhavo.	adj		m.n.s		produced by birthna 			ind				notpāṇo 			n		m.n.s		being, living being, lit. breathpāṇinaṃ 		n		m.dat.pl	to living beingshaññe		v		opt.3.s	should killpāṇaghātī 		n		m.n.s		killer of living beingshi 			ind				indeedsocatī”ti.		v		pr.3.s		sorrows, grieves, mournsif living being could understand thus: this suffering produced by birth, (one) living being should not kill (another) beings, indeed killer of living beings sorrows.18. KN 2.10 Dhp 130  sabbe tasanti daṇḍassa, sabbesaṃ jīvitaṃ piyaṃ.attānaṃ upamaṃ katvā, na haneyya na ghātaye.sabbe		pn		m.n.pl	all tasanti 		v		pr.3.pl	are afraid (of), fearsdaṇḍassa, 		n		m.gen.s	of stick, truncheon, nightstick, clubsabbesaṃ 		pn		m.dat.pl	to alljīvitaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	life, life spanpiyaṃ.		adj		nt.ac.s	dear (to), beloved (by), lovely (for)attānaṃ 		n		m.ac.s	self, himself, herself, itself, yourself, oneself (object)upamaṃ 		n		f.ac.s		simile, comparison, parallelkatvā, 		v		abs		having done, having madena 			ind				nothaneyya 		v		opt.3.s	could hit, beat, injure, strike, hurtna 			ind				notghātaye.		v.caus	opt.3.s	could cause to slay, to killAll are afraid of a stick, life is dear to all. Having made the comparison with onself, may one not hurt, may not cause to kill.19. K.N.-a V.v.1.1.8sabbe’p’ime gāmavāsino maṃ hanantu vā bandhantu vā, īdise(edise) puññakkhette pānīyadānaṃ dassāmi evā”ti … vanditvā pānīyena nimantesi.sabbe-		pn				allime 			n		m.n.pl	thesegāmavāsino	n		m.n.pl	villagersmaṃ 			pn		1.ac.s	mehanantu 		v		imp.3.pl	may kill, should strikevā 			ind				orbandhantu 		v		imp.3.pl	may bind, should tie up, imprisonvā			ind				orīdise(edise) 	adj		nt.loc.s	in suchpuññakkhette 	n		nt.loc.s	in field of meritpānīya-		n				water, drinking water, lit. drinkabledānaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	alms, gift, giving, offering, charitydassāmi 		v		fut.1.s	I will giveevā”ti 		ind				only, just, so, evenvanditvā 		v		abs		having bowed, having paid respect, having 									honouredpānīyena 		n		m.ins.s	with water, drinking water, lit. drinkablenimantesi.		v		aor.3.s	invited (to), called (to)All these villager should kill or imprison me. I will offer a drinking water to such field of merit… Having paid respect, he invited to drink.20. S.N. 6.2“sabbe saddhammagaruno, vihaṃsu viharanti ca.tathāpi viharissanti, esā buddhāna-dhammatā.“sabbe 		pn		m.n.pl	allsaddhamma-	n				True Teaching, true doctrine, true nature of thingsgaruno, 		adj		m.n.pl	respected, esteemedvihaṃsu 		v		aor.3.pl	they livedviharanti 		v		pr.3.pl	live, stay, remain, continueca.			ind				andtathā’pi 		ind				also likewiseviharissanti, 	v		fut.3.pl	they will liveesā 			pn		f.n.s		thisbuddhānaṃ 	n		m.gen.pl	of Buddhasdhammatā.		n		f.n.s		nature, character, characteristic, attributeAll True Teachings that is now, in the past and even in the future, all they respected by the Buddhas’. This Is the Buddhas’ nature. 
 Examples 13  1. SN 11.4	 yo have balavā santo, dubbalassa titikkhati.tamāhu paramaṃ khantiṃ, niccaṃ khamati dubbalo.yo 			pn		m.n.s		whoever, whohave 			ind				indeed, surelybalavā 		adj		m.n.s		strong, powerfulsanto, 		pr.p		m.n.s		being, existingdubbalassa 	adj		m.dat.s	to frail, weak, feebletitikkhati.		v.desid	pr.3.s		endures, tolerates, bears, withstands	tamāhu 		idiom				they had said that thattam-			pn		m.ac.s	thatāhu			v		perf.3.pl	they had saidparamaṃ 		adj		f.ac.s		very highest, very worst, ultimate, superior, 									sublime, most extreme, lit. furthestkhantiṃ, 		n		f.ac.s		patience, endurance, toleranceniccaṃ 		ind				continuously, always, permanentlykhamati 		v		pr.3.s		endures, tolerates, bears, withstandsdubbalo.		adj		m.n.s		frail, weak, feebleWhoever indeed being strong tolerates the weaker one, ‘that is ultimate patience’ they said. Weak always tolerates (anyway).							2. SN 11.23addasā kho, bhikkhave, vepacitti asurindo sakkaṃ devānamindaṃ dūratova āgacchantaṃ. disvāna sakkaṃ devānamindaṃ etadavoca — ‘tikiccha maṃ devānamindā’ti.addasā 		v		imperf.3.s		he sawkho, 			ind					indeed, surely, certainly, trulyVepacitti 		n		m.n.s			An Asura VepacittiAsurindo 		n		m.n.s			Lord of the Dark Ones, king of Asuras.Sakkaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		Sakka, king of the DevasDevānam-		n		m.gen.pl		of deities, of Devas	indaṃ 		n		m.n.s			lord, kingdūratova 		ind					from far away, from afarāgacchantaṃ	prp		n.ac.s		coming, approaching, arrivingdisvāna 		v		abs			having seenSakkaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		Sakka, king of the DevasDevānamindaṃ 		n	m.ac.s		Lord of the Shining Ones, epithet of Sakkaetad’avoca 		v		aor.3.s		he said this‘tikiccha 		v.desid	imp.2.s		heal, curemaṃ 			pn		1.ac.s		meDevānam’indā’ti. 		n	m.voc.s		o Lord of the Shining Ones, epithet of SakkaVepacitti, king of the Dark Ones, saw Sakka, Lord of the Shining Ones, arriving from far away. Having seen Sakka,  Lord of the Shining Ones, he said this: “O Lord of the Shining Ones, heal me!”3. SN 7.9seyyathāpi nāma phālo divasaṃ-santatto udake pakkhitto cicciṭāyati ciṭiciṭāyati sandhūpāyati sampadhūpāyati; evameva so habyaseso udake pakkhitto cicciṭāyatiseyyathāpi 		ind					just like, as ifnāma 		ind					certainly, truly, for surephālo 		n		m.n.s			ploughshare, cutting blade of a ploughdivasaṃ-		ind					by day, during the day	santatto 		pp		m.n.s			heated, made red-hotudake 		n		nt.loc.s		in waterpakkhitto 		pp		m.n.s			thrown (into), plunged (into), dropped (into)cicciṭāyati 		v, onom	pr.3.s			hisses, sizzles, fizzles, cracklesciṭiciṭāyati 		v, onom	pr.3.s			hisses, sizzles, fizzles, cracklessandhūpāyati 	v, deno	pr.3.s			smokessampadhūpāyati;		v.deno	pr.3.s		smokes, steams	evameva 		ind					similarly, in the same way, so too, just soso 			pn		m.n.s			that, hehabya-seso 	n		m.n.s			remains of a sacrificial offeringudake 		n		nt.loc.s		in water pakkhitto 		pp		m.n.s			thrown (into), plunged (into), dropped (into)cicciṭāyati 		v, onom	pr.3.s			hisses, sizzles, fizzles, cracklesJust like ploughshare, heated during the day, thrown into water, hisses, sizzles, smokes and steams. In the same way that remains of a sacrificial offering, thrown into water, fizzles.4. KN-a Ja 1, 278atheko lolamakkaṭo rukkhā otaritvā tassa piṭṭhiṃ abhiruhitvā ... naṅguṭṭhe gahetvā dolāyantova kīḷi.atha-			ind					then, also, and so, after that		eko			adj		m.n.s			one			 lola-			adj					restless, hyperactive, agitatedmakkaṭo 		n		m.n.s			monkey, aperukkhā 		n		m.abl.s		from treeotaritvā 		v		abs			having descended, having gone downtassa 		pn		m.dat.s		of that, hispiṭṭhiṃ 		n		f.ac.s			back, lit. what stands prominentlyabhiruhitvā 	v		abs			having climbed on top (of), having ascended, 									having mountednaṅguṭṭhe 		n		nt.loc.s		in tailgahetvā 		v		abs			having grabbed hold (of), having seized, having takendolāyanto-		pr.p		m.n.s			swinging back and forthva kīḷi.			v		aor.3.s		played, had funThen one hyperactive monkey descended from a tree, climbed on top of his back, … , having taken (his) tail and swinging back and forth, (monkey) had fun.5. KN 14.154idhūragānaṃ pavaro paviṭṭho, selassa vaṇṇena pamokkhamicchaṃ.brahmañca vaṇṇaṃ apacāyamāno, bubhukkhito no vitarāmi (visahāmi) bhottuṃ.idha-			ind					here, in this regard, in this caseuragānaṃ 		n		m.gen.pl		of snakes, of Nagas	pavaro 		adj		m.n.s			excellent, distinguished, noblepaviṭṭho		pp		m.n.s			entered, gone (into)selassa 		n		m.gen.s		of crystal, sapphirevaṇṇena 		n		m.ins.s		with appearance, with colourpamokkham-	n		m.ac.s		rescue, deliveranceicchaṃ.		pr.p		m.n.s			wishing, wanting, desiringbrahmañ’ca 	n		m.ac.s		Brahmanvaṇṇaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		casteapacāyamāno, 	pr.p		m.n.s			honouring, paying respect tobubhukkhito 	adj		m.n.s			hungry, lit. wished to eatno 			ind					notvisahāmi		v		pr.1.s			I dare (to)bhottuṃ.		v		inf			to eatIn this regard, the noble of Nagas, with colour of a sapphire, entered, wishing for deliverance. “I am not daring to eat, (even I am) hungry, because I am honoring Brahman caste.” 6. KN 14.253na taṃ yāce yassa piyaṃ jigīse (jigiṃse), desso hoti atiyācanāya.na 			ind					nottaṃ 			pn		m.ac.s		that, himyāce 			v		opt.3.s		could ask, beg, requestyassa 		pn		m.gen.s		of whoever, whopiyaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s		love, friendshipjigiṃse		v		opt.3.s		could desire, want, wish to get, 											lit. wish to conquerdesso 		adj		m.n.s			detestable, dislikeable, disagreeablehoti 			v		pr.3.s			isatiyācanāya.	n		f.dat.s		for asking too muchOne should not ask him, who’s friendship he could wish to get. Asking too much is disagreeable.7. KN 15.546“so puṇṇako kāmavegena giddho, irandhatiṃ nāgakaññaṃ jigiṃsaṃ.gantvāna taṃ bhūtapatiṃ yasassiṃ, iccabravī vessavaṇaṃ kuveraṃ.“so 			pn		m.n.s			he, thatPuṇṇako 		n		m.n.s			Puṇṇakakāmavegena	n		m.ins.s		with power of lust, force of lustgiddho, 		adj		m.n.s			greedy, greedy for, desirous ofIrandhatiṃ 		n		m.ac.s		IrandhatiNāgakaññaṃ 	n		m.ac.s		Nāgakaññajigiṃsaṃ		pr.p		m.ac.s		desiring, wanting, lit. wishing to conquergantvāna 		v		abs			having gone (to), having travelled (to)taṃ 			pn		m.ac.s		that, hebhūtapatiṃ 	n		m.ac.s		Lord of Beings, Lord of the Demons, 										Lord of the Underworldyasassiṃ		adj		m.ac.s		famous, renownedicc-			ind					thusabravī 		v		aor.3.s		saidVessavaṇaṃ 	n		m.ac.s		VessavaṇaKuveraṃ.		n		m.ac.s		King of Uttarakuru.That greedy Puṇṇaka, by the force of lust, desiring for Irandhati Nāgakañña. Having travelled to that famous Lord of Beings, he said thus to Vessavaṇa King of Uttarakuru.8. KN 8.155“devo ca vassati devo ca gaḷagaḷāyati,ekako cāhaṃ bherave bile viharāmi.“devo 		n		m.n.s			rain-cloudca 			ind					andvassati 		v		pr.3.s			rainsdevo 			n		m.n.s			rain-cloudca 			ind					andgaḷagaḷāyati,	v, deno, onom	pr.3.s		pours, thunders, makes a gala-gala soundekako 		adj		m.n.s			alone, solitaryc’āhaṃ 		ind+pn	1.n.s			but I, and yet Ibherave 		adj		nt.loc.s		frightful, terrifying		bile 			n		nt.loc.s		in den, hole, caveviharāmi.		v		pr.1.s			I live, stay, remain, continueRain-cloud rains, rain-cloud thunders, and yet I stay alone in terrifying cave.9. KN-a Dh.p.,2.17.7	 eso vātāhata-tālapaṇṇaṃ viya taṭa-taṭāyati, imassa kathā-pariyanto-yeva natthī’ti nindanti.eso 			pn		m.n.s			this		vāta-			n					wind, air, breezeāhata-		adj					struck, beaten, stampedtālapaṇṇaṃ 	n		nt.n.s			palm leafviya 			ind					like, astaṭataṭāyati, 	v.deno,omon	pr.3.s		makes a racket, makes a ratatatat soundimassa 		pn		m.gen.s		of thiskathā-		n					talk, speech, conversationpariyanto-		n					end, limityeva 			ind					just, only, even, even so, yet, alsonatthī’ti 		v		pr.3.s			is not, it is not, there is not, there is nonindanti.		v		pr.3.pl		they blame, criticiz, find fault“Just as this palm leaf, beaten by the wind, makes a ratatatat sound, there is no end to this speech”, they blame.10. KN-a Dh.p.,2.5.9guṇavantānañhi guṇaṃ buddhā eva pākaṭaṃ kātuṃ sakkonti, avasesajano guṇavantānaṃ guṇaṃ kathento maccharāyati.guṇavantānaṃ	adj		m.gen.pl		of virtuous people’hi 			ind					indeedguṇaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		quality, virtue, characteristicbuddhā 		n		m.n.pl		Buddhaseva 			ind					only, just, so, evenpākaṭaṃ 		adj		m.n.s			famous, well known, widespreadkātuṃ 		v		inf			to do, to makesakkonti		v		pr.3.pl		they are able (to)avasesa-		n					remaining, restjano 			n		m.n.s			men, people, populationguṇavantānaṃ 	adj		m.gen.pl		of virtuous peopleguṇaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		quality, virtue, characteristickathento 		pr.p		m.n.s			speaking, telling (of), relatingmaccharāyati.	v.deno	pr.3.s			becomes envious, is jealousOnly Bhuddhas are able to make well known the quality of virtuous people, the rest population become envious, speaking about quality of virtuous people. 11. AN 8.1 mettāsuttaṃ	 “ekam’pi ce pāṇam’aduṭṭhacitto,mettāyati kusalī tena hoti.“ekam’pi 		adj		m.ac.s		just one, even onece 			ind					ifpāṇam’		n		m.ac.s		being, living being, lit. breathaduṭṭhacitto,	adj		m.n.s			with benevolent mind, lit. not angry mindmettāyati 		v.deno	pr.3.s			has goodwill towards, is kind (to)kusalī 		adj		m.n.s			virtuous person, who has merittena 			ind					thereby, because of that, on that account, 									lit. by that, with thathoti.			v		pr.3.s			he isIf one with benevolent mind has goodwill towards just one living being, thereby he is a  virtuous person.sabbe ca pāṇe manasānukampī,pahūtamariyo pakaroti puññaṃ.sabbe 		adj		m.ac.pl		allca 			ind					andpāṇe 			n		m.ac.pl		beings, living beings, lit. breathmanasi-		n		m.loc.s		in mindānukampī,		adj		m.n.s			compassionate, sympatheticpahūtam-		adj		nt.ac.s		much, considerable, abundantariyo			n		m.n.s			noble one pakaroti 		v		pr.3.s			effects, performs, prepares, makes, doespuññaṃ.		n		nt.ac.s		merit, good deed, lit. (mental) purityCompassionate in mind to all living beings, noble one makes abundant merit.12. Abhi Vibh, 13.1.2		 seyyathāpi nāma ekaṃ puggalaṃ duggataṃ durūpetaṃ disvā karuṇāyeyya, evameva sabbe satte karuṇāya pharati.seyyathāpi 		ind					just like, as if, imagine ifnāma 		ind					certainly, truly, for sureekaṃ 		adj		m.ac.s		one, sertanpuggalaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		personduggataṃ 		adj		m.ac.s		faring badly, poor, miserable, suffering, 										unfortunatedurūpetaṃ 		adj		m.ac.s		poor, unfortunate, lit. bad conditiondisvā 		v		abs			having seen, having understood, having foundkaruṇāyeyya, 	v, deno	opt.3.s		could feel sorry (for), feel compassion, 										have kindness (for)evameva 		ind					similarly, in the same way, so too, just sosabbe 		adj		m.ac.pl		allsatte 			n		m.ac.pl		living beingskaruṇāya 		n		f.ins.s		with compassion, sympathy, kindness pharati.		v		pr.3.s			spreads, pervades, suffuses, fillsJust like having seen a person, truly miserable and unfortunate, one may feel compassion (to him), in the same way one spreads compassion to all living beings.13. KN-a Dh.p.1.5.3bālo putta-taṇhāya c’eva dhana-taṇhāya ca haññati vihaññati dukkhayatibālo 			n		m.n.s			fool, immature personputta-			n					son, childtaṇhāya 		n		f.ins.s		attachmentc’eva 		ind					and evendhana-		n					wealth, riches, treasuretaṇhāya 		n		f.ins.s		attachmentca 			ind					andhaññati 		v		pr.3.s			is struck, is stabbed, is beaten, is affected byvihaññati 		v		pr.3.s			is troubled (by), is afflicted (by), lit. is beatendukkhayati		v		pr.3.s			suffers pain, suffers anguishFool is affected, is troubled and suffers pain from attachments to children and wealth.14. DN 11.2imaṃ kho ahaṃ, kevaṭṭa, iddhipāṭihāriye ādīnavaṃ sampassamāno iddhipāṭihāriyena aṭṭīyāmi harāyāmi jigucchāmiimaṃ 		pn		m.ac.s		thiskho 			ind					indeedahaṃ, 		pn		1.n.s			Ikevaṭṭa, 		n		m.voc.s		o fisherman!iddhipāṭihāriye 	n		nt.loc.s		in miracle of psychic powerādīnavaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s		danger (in), disadvantage (of), risk (of)sampassamāno		pr.p		m.n.s		seeing, considering iddhipāṭihāriyena 	n	nt.ins.s		with miracle of psychic poweraṭṭīyāmi 		v		pr.1.s			I am troubled (by), repelled (by), perturbedharāyāmi 		v		pr.1.s			I am ashamed (of), humiliated (by), worriedjigucchāmi		v		pr.1.s			I detest, am disgusted (by), get sick (of)O fisherman! Considering danger in miracle of psychic power, I am troubled,  ashamed and  disgusted with miracle of psychic power.15. KN 14.322“duddubhāyati bhaddante, yasmiṃ dese vasām’ahaṃ.aham’p’etaṃ na jānāmi, kim’etaṃ duddubhāyatī”ti.“duddubhāyati 	v.omon	pr.3.s			makes the sound ‘dad-dad’bhaddante, 	n		m.voc.s		venerable, siryasmiṃ		pn		m.loc.s		in whatever dese 			n		m.loc.s		in place, location, region, areavasāmi-		v		pr.1.s			I live	ahaṃ.		pn		1.n.s			Iahaṃ-		pn		1.n.s			Iapi-			ind					nut, yetetaṃ 			pn		m.ac.s		this, itna 			ind					notjānāmi, 		v		pr.1.s			I knowkim’			pn		m.ac.s		what, howetaṃ 			pn		nt.n.s			that, itduddubhāyatī”ti.		v.omon	pr.3.s		makes the sound ‘dad-dad’Venerable, in whatever place I live, it makes the sound ‘dad-dad’. Yet I do not now: “What makes that sound ‘dad-dad’?”16. KN-a Dh.p.,1.4.10so gehā nikkhamitvā ... “akkhīni me dhūmāyantī”ti vatvā nalāṭe hatthaṃ ṭhapetvā uddhaṃ oloketvā “aho dukkhaṃ, ayyo no mahā-kassapatthero cirassaṃ me kuṭidvāraṃ āgato, atthi nu kho kiñci gehe”ti āha.so 			pn		m.n.s			that, hegehā 			n		m.abl.s		from house, dwellingnikkhamitvā 	v		abs			having gone out (from), having exited, 										having left“akkhīni 		n		nt.n.pl		eyesme 			pn		1.gen.s		mydhūmāyantī”ti 	v		pr.3.pl		they are smoking, are cloudy, are mistyvatvā 		v		abs			having saidnalāṭe 		n		m.loc.s		in foreheadhatthaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		handṭhapetvā 		v		abs			having placed, having putuddhaṃ 		ind					above, up, on topoloketvā 		v		abs			having looked, having observed, “aho 			ind					oh! oh dear!dukkhaṃ, 		ind					badly, with difficulty, uncomfortablyayyo 			n		m.n.s			venerable, sir, masterno 			pn		1.gen.pl		our		mahā-kassapatthero 	n	m.n.s			elder Maha Kassapacirassaṃ 		ind					at last, a long time since, after a long timeme 			pn		1.gen.s		my		kuṭidvāraṃ 	n		nt.ac.s		hut’s entrance, hut’s gatewayāgato			pp		m.n.s			has come, arrivedatthi 			v		pr.3.s			there isnu kho 		ind					does? is? would?kiñci 			pn		m.ac.s		some, something, anythinggehe”ti 		n		nt.loc.s		house, dwellingāha.			v		perf.3.s		had saidHaving left the house, he said: “My eyes are misty!”. Placing hand on the forehead and looking up, he said: “Oh, dukkha! Our venerable elder Maha Kassapa at last has come to my hut’s entrance. Is there something (to offer) in the house?”17. SN 4.23tena kho pana samayena dhūmāyitattaṃ timirāyitattaṃ gacchateva purimaṃ disaṃ, gacchati pacchimaṃ disaṃtena kho pana samayena 	idiom			now at that time, now on that occasiondhūmāyitattaṃ 		n	nt.n.s			a cloud of smoketimirāyitattaṃ 		n	nt.n.s			a cloud of darknessgacchati-		v		pr.3.s			goes, walks, moves, wanders aroundeva 			ind					only, just, so, evenpurimaṃ 		adj		f.ac.s			easterndisaṃ, 		n		f.ac.s			direction, cardinal pointgacchati 		v		pr.3.s			goes, walks, moves, wanders aroundpacchimaṃ 	adj		f.ac.s			west, westerndisaṃ 		n		f.ac.s			direction, cardinal point		Now at that time a cloud of smoke, a cloud of darkness, moves to the eastern direction and it moves to the western direction.18. KN-a Ja 542“tatth’eva vasanto paṇḍitaṃ vīmaṃsatū””ti amaccassa dūtaṃ paṭipesesi. taṃ sutvā amacco tattheva vasanto paṇḍitaṃ vīmaṃsi.“tatth’eva 		ind					right there, in that place, on the spotvasanto 		pr.p		m.n.s			living, stayingpaṇḍitaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		sage, intelligent person, wise manvīmaṃsatū””ti 	v		imp.3.s		investigate, examine, testamaccassa		n		m.dat.s		to councillor, consul, advisor dūtaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		messengerpaṭipesesi. 		v		aor.3.s		sent back taṃ 			pn		m.ac.s		thatsutvā 		v		abs			having heard, having listenedamacco 		n		m.n.s			councillor, consul, advisor tattheva 		ind					right there, in that place, on the spotvasanto 		pr.p		m.n.s			living, stayingpaṇḍitaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		sage, intelligent person, wise manvīmaṃsi.		v		aor.3.s		investigated, examined, tested“Staying there he should examine a sage.” - he sent back a messenger to the consul. Having heard that (message) consul staying there tested the sage.
 Examples 14  1. DN 5.10 “tasmiṃ kho, brāhmaṇa, yaññe n’eva gāvo haññiṃsu, na ajeḷakā haññiṃsu, … , na rukkhā chijjiṃsu yūpatthāya, na dabbhā lūyiṃsu barihisatthāya.“tasmiṃ			pn		m.loc.s		in that kho, 				ind					indeed, surely, certainly, trulybrāhmaṇa, 			n		m.voc.s		o Brahmanyaññe 			n		m.loc.s		in sacrifice, offeringn’eva 			ind					neither, notgāvo 				n		m.n.pl 		cattlehaññiṃsu, 			v.pass	aor.3.pl		they were killed, were destroyedna 				ind					norajeḷakā 			n		m.n.pl		goats and sheephaññiṃsu, 			v.pass	aor.3.pl		they were killed, were destroyedna  				ind					norrukkhā 			n		m.n.pl		treeschijjiṃsu 			v.pass	aor.3.pl		were cut, were cut downyūpa-				n					sacrificial posttthāya			adj		m.dat.s		for the purpose of living (on), living (in), 										standing (on), situated (on)na  				ind					nordabbhā 			n		m.n.pl		kusa grasslūyiṃsu 			v.pass	aor.3.pl		were cut, were reapedbarihisa-			n					sacrificial grasstthāya			adj					living (on), living (in), standing (on), 										situated (on)In that  sacrifice, o Brahmin, neither cattle were killed, nor goats and sheep were killed, nor trees were cut for the purpose of sacrificial post, nor kusa-grass were cut for the purpose of sacrificial grass.2. KN 10.3	sāriputta therāpadānaṃ	 tath’ev’ime catubbaṇṇā, pabbajitvā tav’antike. jahanti purimaṃ nāmaṃ, buddhaputtā’ti ñāyare.tath’eva-			ind				likewise, in the same way, lit. just like thisime				pn		m.n.pl		thesecatubbaṇṇā, 		n		m.n.pl		people from four castes, four social 										classespabbajitvā 			v		abs			having ordained, having renounced the 										household lifetāva-				ind					that much, as long as, to that extent,    										until, at leastantike.			adj		m.loc.s		around, near, at the time of		      jahanti 			v		pr.3.pl		give up, leave, abandon, renouncepurimaṃ 			adj		nt.ac.s		earlier, past, former, previousnāmaṃ, 			n		nt.ac.s		namebuddhaputtā’ti 		n		m.n.pl		sons of the Buddha, children of the 										Buddhañāyare.			v.pass	pr.refl.3.pl		they are known asIndeed these people from four social classes, having renounced the household life, at that time they renounce previous names, and they are known as ‘sons of the Buddha’3. KN 10.3ye keci gaṇino loke, satthāro’ti pavuccare.paramparāgataṃ dhammaṃ, desenti parisāya te.ye 				pn		m.n.pl		whateverkeci 				pn		m.n.pl		somegaṇino 			n		m.n.pl		those who have a following.loke, 				n		m.loc.s		in the worldsatthāro’ti 			n		m.n.pl		teacherpavuccare.			v.pass	pr.refl.3.pl		they are called themself, can be calledparamparā-		n					linage, lit. next to the nextgataṃ 			pp		m.ac.s		gone, wentdhammaṃ, 		n		m.ac.s		Dhamma, Teachingdesenti 			v		pr.3.pl		they preach, teach, explainparisāya 			n		f.dat.s		to assembly, meeting, forum, gatheringte.				pn		m.n.pl		those, theyThose who have followers in the world are called “Teachers”, they preach to assembly the teaching, what was handed down by linage.4. SN 1.62		 cittena nīyati loko, cittena parikassaticittena 			n		m.ins.s		by mindnīyati 			v.pass	pr.3.s			is led (by), is led astray (by), is led aboutloko, 				n		m.n.s			world						    cittena			n		m.ins.s		by mind		 parikassati			v.pass	pr.3.s			is dragged about (by), is afflicted (by), is 										harassed (by)				The world is led by mind, by mind it is dragged around.cittassa ekadhammassa, sabb’eva vasamanvagū”ti.cittassa 			n		m.gen.s		of mindekadhammassa, 		n		m.gen.s		one single thingsabb’eva 			pn		m.n.pl		all justvasaṃ-			n		m.ac.s		control, authority, power, masteryanvagū”ti.			v		imperf.3.pl		they followed, went nearEverything went under the control of one single thing – the mind.5. SN 3.9	aj’eḷakā ca gāvo ca, vividhā yattha haññare.na taṃ sammaggatā yaññaṃ, upayanti mahesino.aj’eḷakā 			n		m.n.pl		goats and sheepca 				ind					andgāvo 				n		m.n.pl		cattleca,  				ind					andvividhā 			adj		m.n.pl		various kinds ofyattha 			ind					wherever, wherehaññare.			v.pass	pr.refl.3.pl		they are hurt, are killed, are destroyedna 				ind					nottaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s		thatsammaggatā 		adj		m.nom.pl		correctly gone, going the right way, 										perfectedyaññaṃ, 			n		m.ac.s		sacrifice, offeringupayanti 			v		pr.3.pl		they attend, go (to), go near, approachemahesino.			n		m.nom.pl		great sagesWhere various kinds of goats, sheep and cattle are destroyed, that sacrifice does not attend great sages, who perfected properly.6. SN 1.41		ādittasmiṃ agārasmiṃ, yaṃ nīharati bhājanaṃ.taṃ tassa hoti atthāya, no ca yaṃ tattha ḍayhati.ādittasmiṃ 			adj		m.loc.s		when blazing, burning, on fireagārasmiṃ, 		n		m.loc.s		when dwelling, building, house, hutyaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s		whatevernīharati 			v		pr.3.s			removes, extracts, takes out, salvagesbhājanaṃ.			n		nt.ac.s		bowl, vesseltaṃ 				pn		m.ac.s		thattassa 			pn		m.dat.s		to himhoti				v		pr.3.s			is atthāya, 			n		m.dat.s		for the purpose (of), for the sake (of),										 for the good (of)no 				ind					notca 				ind					and, butyaṃ  				pn		nt.n.s			whatevertattha 			ind					there, in that placeḍayhati.			v.pass	pr.3.s			is burned, is scorchedWhen the house is burning, one takes out that vessel, which is useful for him, but not that is burned there.7. SN 7.14assova jiṇṇo nibbhogo, khādanā apanīyati.asso’va 			n		m.n.s			like a horsejiṇṇo 				adj		m.n.s			aged, old, ancientnibbhogo, 			adj		m.n.s			poor, uselesskhādanā 			n		nt.abl.s		from food, eatingapanīyati.			v.pass	pr.3.s			is led away (from), is taken away (from)Like a useless and old horse is led away from food.8. SN 2.23tassa mayhaṃ, bhante, catūsu dvāresu dānaṃ dīyittha. ... atha kho maṃ itthāgāraṃ upasaṅkamitvā etadavoca — ‘devassa kho dānaṃ dīyati; amhākaṃ dānaṃ na dīyati.tassa 			pn		m.gen.s		of thismayhaṃ, 			pn		1.gen.s		my, minebhante, 			v		m.voc.s		sir, lord, reverendcatūsu 			card		m.loc.pl		in four, among fourdvāresu 			n		m.loc.pl		in doors, entrances, gates, gatewaysdānaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		alms, gift, giving, offering, charitydīyittha			v.pass	imperf.refl.3.s	was given, was offered	atha kho 			ind					then, and then, after thatmaṃ 				pn		1.ac.s		me	itthāgāraṃ 			n		nt.nom.s		harem women			              upasaṅkamitvā 		v		abs			having approached, having gone (to), 										having drawn near (to)etadavoca — 		v		aor.3.s		he said this‘devassa 			n		m.gen.s		of kingkho 				ind					indeeddānaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		alms, gift, giving, offering, charitydīyati; 			v.pass	pr.3.s			is given, is offeredamhākaṃ 			pn		1.gen.pl		our, of usdānaṃ  			n		nt.ac.s		alms, gift, giving, offering, charityna 				ind					notdīyati.			v.pass	pr.3.s			is given, is offeredMy charity was given at the four gates, … , Then, venerable, the harem women approached me and said: ‘Indeed charity of the king is given. Our charity is not given.”9. DN 4.5vihaññati kho ayaṃ soṇadaṇḍo brāhmaṇo sakena cittena. yaṃnūnāhaṃ soṇadaṇḍaṃ brāhmaṇaṃ sake ācariyake tevijjake pañhaṃ cheyyan””ti.“vihaññati 			v.pass	pr.3.s			is troubled (by), is worried (about), 										is afflicted (by), lit. is beatenkho 				ind					indeed, surely, certainly, trulyayaṃ 			pn		m.n.s			this, this person, this thingsoṇadaṇḍo 		n		m.n.s			Soṇadaṇḍabrāhmaṇo 			n		m.n.s			Brahman, priest, man of the Brahman 										castesakena 			adj		nt.ins.s		with one’s own, my owncittena. 			n		nt.ins.s		with mind, heartyaṃnūnāhaṃ 		ind					what if I were tosoṇadaṇḍaṃ		n		m.ac.s		Soṇadaṇḍabrāhmaṇaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		Brahman, priest, man of the Brahman   sake 				adj		m.loc.s		in one’s own, my ownācariyake 			n		m.loc.s		in teachingtevijjake 			n		m.loc.s		in knower of the 3 Vedaspañhaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		question, enquirypuccheyyan”ti.		v		opt.3.pl		they could ask, enquire, would questionThis Brahman Soṇadaṇḍa is troubled by his mind. What if I were to ask Brahman Soṇadaṇḍa about his teaching of the 3 Vedas?10. DN 11.5yathā nimittā dissanti, āloko sañjāyati, obhāso pātubhavati, brahmā pātubhavissatiyathā 			ind					just as, even as, in whatever waynimittā 			n		m.n.pl		signs, symbols, images, mental image								or	sign, omen, portentdissanti, 			v.pass	pr.3.pl		are seenāloko 			n		m.n.s			light, brightness, claritysañjāyati, 			v.pass	pr.3.s			appears, arises, is born, is producedobhāso 			n		m.n.s			light, radiance, aura, beams of lightpātubhavati, 		v		pr.3.s			appears in front, manifests, 													becomes evidentbrahmā 			n		m.n.s			God, creator godpātubhavissati, 		v		fut.3.s		will appear in front, manifest, become 											evidentJust as signs are seen, light arises, radiance manifests, the Brahma will appear in front.11. KN-a Dh.p.,1,1,1cakkhūni nassantu vā bhijjantu vā, buddhasāsanameva dhārehi, mā cakkhūnī”ticakkhūni 			n		nt.n.pl		eyesnassantu 			v		imp.3.pl		may be perished, should end, get lost, 										must 	be destroyedvā 				ind					orbhijjantu			v		Imp.3.pl		may be broken, must be destroyed vā, 				ind					orbuddhasāsanam-	n		nt.ac.s		Buddha’s teaching, Buddha’s messageeva 				ind					only, just, so, evendhārehi, 			v		imp.3.s		may bear in mind, must keep in mind, 										remembermā 				ind					do not, may one not, don’t letcakkhūnī”ti			n		nt.ac.pl		eyesEyes may be perished or may be broken, but one must keep in mind the Buddha’s teaching, not the eyes.12. KN-a Dh.p.,1,1,1athassa majjhimayāme atikkante apubbaṃ acarimaṃ akkhīni ceva kilesā ca bhijjiṃsu.ath’assa			pp		m.gen.s 		then his, as hismajjhimayāme 		n		m.loc.s		when middle part (of the night)atikkante 			pp		m.loc.s		when gone past, passed byapubbaṃ 			ind					not beforeacarimaṃ 			ind					not laterakkhīni 			n		nt.n.pl		eyesceva 				ind					and even, as well askilesā 			n		m.n.pl		defilements, impuritiesca 				ind					andbhijjiṃsu.			c		aor.3.pl		they were broken, were destroyedWhen the middle part of the night gone past, (his) eyes and defilements were simultaneously destroyed.13. Dhp 127 pāpavaggo	 na antalikkhe na samuddamajjhe, na pabbatānaṃ vivaraṃ pavissa.na 				ind					notantalikkhe 			n		m.loc.s		in the sky, in the airna 				ind					notsamuddamajjhe, 		n		m.loc.s		in the middle of the oceanna 				ind					notpabbatānaṃ 		n		m.gen.s		mountain, hillvivaraṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		crack, crevice, cleft, holepavissa.			v		ger			entering, going (into)Not in the air, not in the middle of the ocean, not entering the hole in the mountains.na vijjatī so jagatippadeso, yattha-ṭṭhito mucceyya pāpakammā.	na 				ind					notvijjatī 				v		pr.3.s			exists (in), is found (in), is present (in)so 				pn		m.n.s			he, thatjagati-ppadeso, 		n		m.n.s			place on earth, place in the worldyattha-			ind					wherever, whereṭhito 				pp		m.n.s			remained, stayed, wasmucceyya 			v		opt.3.s		could be free,  would be releasedpāpakammā.		n		m.abl.s		from bad deed, crime, evil action, 											wrongdoing, misconductThere is no place in the world, where one can be free from (the consequences of) evil deeds.14. MN 5.1tam’enaṃ jano disvā evaṃ vadeyya — ‘ambho, kim’ev’idaṃ harīyati jañña-jaññaṃ viyā’ti?tam’enaṃ			pn		m.ac.s		that one, him, her, thatjano 				n		m.n.s			man, person, fellowdisvā 			v		abs			having seen, having understood, having 										foundevaṃ 			ind					thus, this, like this, just as, suchvadeyya — 		v		opt.3.s		could speak, say‘ambho, 			ind					hey! yo!kiṃ-				pn		nt.n.s			whateva-				ind					only, just, so, evenidaṃ 				pn		nt.n.s			thisharīyati 			v.pass	pr.3.s			is carried, is being carried aroundjañña-			adj					lovely, precious, lit. well bornjaññaṃ 			adj		nt.n.s			lovely, precious, lit. well bornviyā’ti?			ind					like, asHaving seen that, the man could say thus: “Hey! What is this carried like a lovely thing?”15. AN 4.25	 nayidaṃ, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaṃ vussati janakuhanatthaṃ, na janalapanatthaṃ, na lābhasakkārasilokānisaṃsatthaṃ, na itivādappamokkhānisaṃsatthaṃ, na ‘iti maṃ jano jānātū’ti. atha kho idaṃ, bhikkhave, brahmacariyaṃ vussati saṃvaratthaṃ pahānatthaṃ virāgatthaṃ nirodhatthan”ti.na-y-idaṃ, 			pn		nt.n.s			not thisbhikkhave, 			v		m.voc.pl		o monksbrahmacariyaṃ 		n		nt.n.s			spiritual path, holy life, celibacyvussati 			v.pass	pr.3.s			is livedjana-				n					men, people, populationkuhana-			n					deception, hypocrisy, false holiness, 										religious fraudatthaṃ			ind		adv			for the sake of; for the purpose of	    na 				ind					notjana-				n					men, people, populationlapana-			n					chatting up, buttering up, wheedling, 										cajoling, sweet talking, flatteringatthaṃ			ind		adv			for the sake of; for the purpose of na  				ind					notlābhasakkāra-		n					gain and honour, acquisitions and 											esteemsiloka-			n					fame, popularityānisaṃsa-			n					profit, benefit, advantage, good resultatthaṃ			ind		adv			for the sake of; for the purpose ofna  				ind					notiti-				ind					thus, this is, and sovāda-				n					debate, argument, disputationpamokkha-			n					letting loose, launching, dischargingānisaṃsa-			n					profit, benefit, advantage, good resultatthaṃ			ind		adv			for the sake of; for the purpose of na  				ind					not‘iti				ind					thus, this is, and so 		maṃ 				pn		1.ac.s		mejano 				n					men, people, population	jānātū’ti. 			v		imp.3.s		may know, let knowO monks, this holy life is not lived for the purpose of deception of the people, not for the  purpose of cajoling of the people, not for the benefit of gain, honour and fame and profit, not for the benefit of discharging thus in debates, not (for the idea): “Let people know me thus.” atha 				ind					but, rather, evenkho 				ind					indeedidaṃ, 			pn		nt.n.s			this		brahmacariyaṃ 		n		nt.n.s			spiritual path, holy life, celibacyvussati 			v.pass	pr.3.s			is livedsaṃvara-			n					control, restraintatthaṃ			ind		adv			for the sake of; for the purpose of pahāna-			n					giving up, letting go, abandoningatthaṃ			ind		adv			for the sake of; for the purpose of virāga-			n					fading of desire, dispassion, 												detachment, indifferenceatthaṃ			ind		adv			for the sake of; for the purpose of nirodha-			n					ending, termination, cessation, finishingatthan”ti.			ind		adv			for the sake of; for the purpose of But this holy life is lived for the purpose of restraint, letting go, dispassion and cessation. 16. KN-a Ja 466“manussasaddo viya suyyati, jānissāma nan”ti saddānusārena gantvā taṃ purisaṃ disvā “yakkho bhavissatī”ti bhītatasitā sare sannayhiṃsu.“manussa-			n					human being, man, personsaddo 			n		m.n.s			sound, noiseviya 				ind					like, assuyyati, 			v.pass	pr.3.s			is heardjānissāma 			v		fut.1.pl		we will know, findnan”ti 			pn		m.ac.s		that, him	sadda- 			n		m.n.s			sound, noiseanusārena 			ind		adv			following aftergantvā 			v		abs			having gone (to), having travelled (to)taṃ 				pn		m.ac.s		thatpurisaṃ 			n		m.ac.s		man, persondisvā 			v		abs			having seen, having understood, having 										foundyakkho 			n		m.n.s			spirit, demonbhavissatī”ti 		v		fut.3.s		will be, should be, must bebhīta-				pp					afraid (of), in danger (of)tasitā 			pp		m.n.pl		trembled, frightened, fearfulsare 				n		m.ac.pl		arrowssannayhiṃsu.		v		aor.3.pl		they readied, armed				Human sound is heared. We will find that. Following after the sound they saw that person. “He must be a demon!” - afraid and trembled, they armed (bows and) arrows.17. VISM 2.19 paccayapariggaha kathā		 diṭṭhi-bandhana-baddhā te, taṇhāsotena vuyhare, taṇhāsotena vuyhantā, na te dukkhā pamuccare.diṭṭhi-				n					view, belief, opinion, concept, theory, 										opinion, attitudebandhana-			n					tie, bond, fetterbaddhā 			pp		m.n.pl		bound, tied, fastened, chained, trappedte, 				pn		m.n.pl		they, thosetaṇhāsotena 		n		m.ins.s		by current of craving, stream of desirevuyhare, 			v.pass	pr.refl.3.pl		are carried away, are swept awaytaṇhāsotena 		n		m.ins.s		by current of craving, stream of desirevuyhantā, 			pr.p		m.n.pl		being carried away, being swept awayna 				ind					notte 				pn		m.n.pl		theydukkhā 			n		nt.abl.s		from discomfort, suffering, pain, unease, 								something unsatisfactory, problem, troublepamuccare.		v.pass	pr.refl.3.pl		are freed (from), are liberated (from)Those who bound by fetter of view, are carried away by stream of craving. Being carried away by stream of craving, they are not liberated from suffering.	18. KN 5.37anekasākhañ’ca sahassa-maṇḍalaṃ, chattaṃ marū dhārayumantalikkhe.suvaṇṇa-daṇḍā vītipatanti cāmarā, na dissare cāmara-chatta-gāhakā.anekasākhaṃ- 		adj		nt.ac.s		many spokes, many ribs (of a sunshade)ca				ind					andsahassa-			adj					one thousand (1000)maṇḍalaṃ, 		n		nt.ac.s		circle, disk, ringchattaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		sunshade, parasol (symbol of prestige)marū 				n		f			god, deity	dhārayuṃ-			v		aor.3.pl		held, kept, carriedantalikkhe.			ind					in the sky, in the airsuvaṇṇa-			adj					golddaṇḍā 			n		m.n.s			handelsvītipatanti 			v		pr.3.pl		fly up and downcāmarā, 			n		m.n.pl		yak’s tail used as a whisk (symbol of 										prestige)na 				ind					notdissare 			v.pass	pr.refl.3.pl		are seencāmara-			n					yak’s tail used as a whisk (symbol of 										prestige)chatta-			n					sunshade, parasol (symbol of prestige)gāhakā.			n		m.n.pl		carrier, bearer, holderDeities held in the sky the parasol with many ribs and with one thousand rings, yak’s tails with golden handels fly up and down and yak’s tails, parasols and holders are not seen.
 Examples 15subjectpredicateobjectenlargement of subjectenlargement of objectextension of predicate 1. KN-a Ja 26ajātasattu-kumāro devadattassa gayāsīse vihāraṃ kāretvā ... divase divase pañca thālipāka-satāni abhihari.ajātasattu-kumāro 		n		m.n.s			prince Ajātasattu	devadattassa 			n		m.dat.s		for Devadattagayāsīse 				n		m.loc.s		in Gayāsīsavihāraṃ 				n		m.n.s			monasterykāretvā 				v		abs			having caused to do, had build or 											construct.divase divase 			ind		adv of time		every day, day after daypañca				adj		-.ac.pl		five thālipāka-				n					bowl of cooked (food)satāni 				adj		nt.ac.pl		hundredabhihari.				v		aor.3.s		brought, offered, servedPrince Ajātasattu had build the monastery for Devadatta in Gayāsīsa. He offered five hundred bowls of cooked (food) every day.compound of two simple sentences.2. KN-a Ja 50“na, bhikkhave, tathāgato idāneva lokassa atthaṃ carati, pubbepi cari-yevā”ti“na, 					ind					notbhikkhave, 				v		m.voc.pl		o monkstathāgato				n		m.n.s			Such Become			 idān’eva 				ind		adv of time		just now, right now, only nowlokassa 				n		m.gen.s		of the worldatthaṃ 				n		m.ac.s		benefit, profit, good, welfare, goalcarati, 				v		pr.3.s			acts, practices, performs, doespubbe’pi 				ind		adv of time		even before, previously, formerly, 											in the past, in a previous life		cari-					v		aor.3.s		acted, practised, performed, didyevā”ti				ind					just, only, even, even so, yet, alsoO monks, not only now the Tathāgata acts for the benefit of the world, even before he acted thus.Complex sentences with first part subordinate.3. DN 16.26ajja kho, pan’ānanda, rattiyā pacchime yāme kusinārāyaṃ upavattane mallānaṃ sālavane antarena yamaka-sālānaṃ tathāgatassa parinibbānaṃ bhavissati.ajja 					ind		adv of time		today, nowkho, 					ind		adv of sertainty	indeed, surely, certainly, trulypana-					ind					moreover, and now, butānanda, 				n		m.voc.s		o Ānandarattiyā 				n		f.gen.s		of the nightpacchime 				adj		m.loc.s		in last, finalyāme 				n		m.loc.s		in the watch (of the night)		kusinārāyaṃ 			n		f.loc.s		in Kusinaraupavattane 			adj		m.loc.s		near tomallānaṃ 				n		m.gen.pl		of the Mallassālavane 				n		nt.loc.s		in Sal wood, Sal groveantarena 				ind		adv of place	in betweenyamakasālānaṃ			n		m.gen.pl		of two Sal treestathāgatassa 			n		m.gen.s		of Such Become	parinibbānaṃ 			n		nt.nom.s		completely gone out (of a fire)bhavissati.				v		fut.3.s		could be, should be, lit. will beĀnanda, today in the last watch of the night, near to Kusinara, in the Upavatta of Mallas in Sal grove, between two Sal trees, should be the completely gone out of the Such Become One.simple sentenceajja kho – adverbal phrases of timerattiyā pacchime yāme– adverbal phrases of timekusinārāyaṃ upavattane mallānaṃ sālavane antarena yamaka-sālānaṃ – adv phrases of place4. KN-a Ja 182satthari hi paṭhama-gamanena kapilapuraṃ gantvā kaniṭṭha-bhātikaṃ nandarājakumāraṃ pabbājetvā kapilapurā nikkhamma anupubbena sāvatthiṃ gantvā viharante āyasmā nando ...  anabhirato ... ahosisatthari 				n		m.loc.s		when the master, when the teacherhi 					ind		adv of certainty	indeed, certainly, truly, definitelypaṭhamaṃ-				ind		adv of time		for the first timegamanena 				n		m.ins.s		by going, walking, journeying, 											travellingkapilapuraṃ 			n		m.ac.s		Kapilapuragantvā 				v		abs			having gone (to), having travelledkaniṭṭha-				adj					youngest, last bornbhātikaṃ 				n		m.ac.s		brotherNandarājakumāraṃ 		n		m.ac.s		prince Nandapabbājetvā 			v		abs			having caused to ordainkapilapurā 				n		m.abl.s		from Kapilapuranikkhamma 			v		ger			leaving, exiting, coming out (of)anupubbena 			ind		adv of manner	gradually, step-by-step, 												successively, stage-by-stagesāvatthiṃ 				n		f.ac.s			Sāvatthigantvā 				v		abs			having gone (to), having travelledviharante 				pr.p		m.loc.s		when living, staying, remaining, 											continuingāyasmā 				n		m.n.s			venerable, lit. old, respectednando  				n		m.n.s			Nandaanabhirato 				adj		m.n.s			dissatisfied, discontent, miserableahosi					v		aor.3.s		was, existed, becameWhen the teacher for the first time by walking travelled to Kapilapura, he ordained (his) youngest brother, prince Nanda, and having leaved from Kapilapura gradually, he travelled to Sāvatthi. While remaining (there), the venerable Nanda became discontent.complex sentences with 5 simple sentesespaṭhama – adv phrase of timegamanena – adv phrase of manneranupubbena – adv phrase of manner 5. SN 22.59  evaṃ me sutaṃ — ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sāvatthiyaṃ viharati jetavane anāthapiṇḍikassa ārāme. evaṃ-			ind					thus; in this wayme 				pn		m.ins.s		by mesutaṃ: 			pp		m.ac.s		heardekaṃ 			adj		m.ac.s		onesamayaṃ 			n		m.ac.s		time; occasionbhagavā, 			n		m.n.s			fortunate one, the buddhasāvatthiyaṃ 		n		f.loc.s		in sāvatthiviharati, 			v		pr.3.s			stays, abides, dwells, 													livesjeta-vane 			n		m.loc.s		in jetavana (jets’s grove)anāthapiṇḍikassa	n		m.gen.s		of anāthapindika ārāme. 			n		m.loc.s		in parkthus was heard by me: on one occasion the fortunate one staying in sāvatthi in jets’s grove in anāthapindika’s park.complex sentences with 2 simple sentesesekaṃ samayaṃ – adv phrse of timetatra kho bhagavā pañcavaggiye bhikkhū āmantesi — “bhikkhavo”ti. “bhadante”ti te bhikkhū bhagavato paccassosuṃ. bhagavā etad-avoca.tatra 				ind		adv of place	there, in that placekho 				ind		adv of sertainty			bhagavā 			n		m.n.s			Sublime One, Blessed One, 												Fortunate One, Buddhapañca-			adj					five (5)vaggiye			adj		m.ac.pl		part of a group, belonging to a collectionbhikkhū 			n		m.ac.pl		monks, mendicants, lit. beggarsāmantesi 			v		aor.3.s		addressed, said (to)“bhikkhavo”ti.		n		m.voc.pl		o monks“bhadante”ti 		n		m.voc.s		o venerable, reverendte 				pn		m.n.pl		they, thosebhikkhū 			n		m.nom.pl		monks, mendicants, lit. beggarsbhagavato 			n		m.dat.s		to the Buddha, for the Buddhapaccassosuṃ. 		v		aor.3.pl		they replied, assented, agreedbhagavā 			n		m.n.s			Sublime One, Blessed One, 												Fortunate One, Buddhaetad-avoca			v		aor.3.s		said thisThere the Blessed One addressed group of five monks: “O monks!”; “O Venerable!” those monks replied to the Blessed One. The Blessed One said this.complex sentences with 3 simple senteses“bhikkhavo”ti – adv phrase of reason and consequence“bhadante”ti –  adv phrase of reason and consequence6. DN 2.2atha kho rājā māgadho ajātasattu vedehiputto ... ārohaṇīyaṃ nāgaṃ abhiruhitvā ukkāsu dhāriyamānāsu rājagahamhā niyyāsiatha kho 			ind		adv of time		and thenrājā 				n		m.n.s			kingmāgadho 			n		m.n.s			Kingdom of Magadhaajātasattu 			n		m.n.s			Ajātasattuvedehiputto 		n		m.n.s			“son of the wise woman”  Vedehiputtaārohaṇīyaṃ 		ptp		m.ac.s		fit to be mountednāgaṃ 			n		m.ac.s		elephantabhiruhitvā 		v		abs			having climbed on top (of), having 											ascended, having mountedukkāsu 			n		f.loc.pl		while torchs, firebrandsdhāriyamānāsu 		prp		f.loc.pl		while being carriedrājagahamhā 		n		m.abl.s		from Rājagahaniyyāsi			v		aor.3.s		left, went out (from), exitedAnd then king of Magadha Ajātasattu Vedehiputta, …, having mounted a suitable elephant, left from Rājagaha while torchs were carried.complex sentences with 2 simple sentesesukkāsu dhāriyamānāsu – adv phrase of manner7. KN 11.17‘na h’evaṃ vandiyā buddhā, yathā vandasi gotamī.“‘kathaṃ carahi sabbaññū, vanditabbā tathāgatā.‘na 				ind					noth’evaṃ			ind 		adv of manner	indeed thus	vandiyā 			ptp		m.n.pl		should be honoured			buddhā, 			n		m.n.pl		Buddhas, Awakened Onesyathā 			ind					like, as, according to, on account ofvandasi 			v		pr.2.s			you pay respect, honourgotamī.			n		f.voc.s		Gotamī“‘kathaṃ 			ind		adv of manner	how? why?carahi 			ind		adv of time		then, therefore, nowsabbaññū, 			adj		m.n.pl		Omniscient, all knowing, complete 											understandingvanditabbā 		ptp		m.n.pl		should be respected, should be 											honouredtathāgatā.			n		m.n.pl		Such Become, Realised, being in such a 									state“Not like this the Buddhas should be honoured, like you honour, Gotamī.” “Then how Omniscients Such Becomes should be honoured?”complex sentences with 2 simple sentesesyathā vandasi gotamī – adv phrase of mannerāraddhavīriye pahitatte, niccaṃ daḷhaparakkame.samagge sāvake passa, etaṃ buddhāna-vandanaṃ.when with energy aroused with state of resolute intention, when continuously with persistent effort, when harmonious, when seeing disciples, this is the worship of the Buddha.8. KN 2.18	 malavaggo Dhp 239	 anupubbena medhāvī, thokaṃ thokaṃ khaṇe khaṇe.kammāro rajatass’eva, niddhame malam’attano.anupubbena 		ind		adv of manner	gradually, step-by-step, successively, 										stage-by-stagemedhāvī, 			n		m.n.s			intelligent man, wise man, lit. who has 										wisdomthokaṃ thokaṃ 		idiom		adv of manner	little by little, bit by bit, piece by piecekhaṇe khaṇe		idiom		adv of manner	moment by moment, second by secondkammāro 			n		m.n.s			smith, metal workerrajatassa-			n		nt.gen.s		of silveriva, 				ind		adv of couse	like, asniddhame 			v		opt.3.s		could blow off, remove by blowing, 										purifiemalam-			n		nt.ac.s		dirt, impurity, stain, dross, filth, grime, 										tarnish, grunge, contaminantattano.			adj		m.gen.s		of self, of oneself, one’s own, my ownWise man gradually, little by little, moment by moment, like a smith (deals) with silver, he should purifie one’s own stains.complex sentence with kammāro rajatass’eva as subordinate9. KN-a Dh.p.1.6.5sabbaṃ tissakumārassa vatthumhi vuttaniyāmen’eva veditabbaṃsabbaṃ 			adj		nt.n.s			all, everythingtissakumārassa 		n		m.gen.s		of the prince Tissavatthumhi 			n		m.loc.s		in the story, case, example, themevuttaniyāmena-		ptp		m.ins.s		by should be told, should be related, as 										it was told’eva 				ind					only, just, so, evenveditabbaṃ		ptp		nt.n.s			can be known, should be understood, 										must be experiencedEverything should be understood just as it was told in the story of the prince Tissa.simple sentencetissakumārassa vatthumhi vuttaniyāmen’eva – adv phrase of manner10. KN-a Dh.p.1.6.9sāvatthiyaṃ kir’eko upāsako dhammena samena agāraṃ ajjhāvasati.sāvatthiyaṃ		n		f.loc.s		in Sāvatthi kira-				ind		adv of certainly	it is said, allegedly, apparently, one 										would think, I have heard, people sayeko				adj		m.n.s			one, a certain upāsako 			n		m.n.s			lay disciple, lay devotee, lit. who sits 										neardhammena 		ind		adv of manner	righteously, lawfully, ethically, religiously, 									morallysamena 			ind		adv of manner	impartially, peacefully, calmlyagāraṃ 			n		m.ac.s		dwelling, building, house, hutajjhāvasati.			v		pr.3.s			lives (in), inhabits, stays (in)It is said, that in Sāvatthi a certain lay devotee stays at home righteously and peacefully.simple sentencesāvatthiyaṃ – adv phrase of placedhammena samena – adv phrase of manner11. KN-a Dh.p.,1.6.5‘ahaṃ pubbe puññaṃ akatattā kiñci na labhāmī’ti‘ahaṃ 			pn		1.n.s			Ipubbe 			ind		adv of time		before, previously, formerly, in the past, 										in a previous lifepuññaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		merit, good deed, lit. (mental) purityakatattā 			n		nt.abl.s		because of not doing, because of not 										making, lit. from state of not doingkiñci 				pn		m.ac.s		something, anythingna				ind					not labhāmī’ti			v		pr.1.s			I get, obtainI am not getting something because of not doing good deed in the past.simple sentence pubbe puññaṃ akatattā – adv phrase of reason12. KN-a Dh.p.,1.6.4attano sāmike kāsāvadhare muṇḍakasīse disvā cittaṃ ekaggaṃ na bhaveyya, tena magga-phalāni pattuṃ na sakkuṇeyyuṃ. tasmā acalasaddhāya patiṭṭhitakāle tāsaṃ te bhikkhū arahattappatteyeva dassesi.attano 			adj		m.gen.s		of self, of oneself, one’s own, ownsāmike 			n		m.ac.pl		husbandskāsāva-dhare		adj		m.ac.pl		wearing brown red robemuṇḍakasīse		adj		m.ac.pl		with shaven headdisvā 			v		abs			having seen, having understood, 											having foundcittaṃ 			n		nt.n.s			mindekaggaṃ 			adj		nt.n.s			unified, calm, collected, lit. in one placena 				ind					notbhaveyya, 			v		opt.3.s		could betena 				ind		adv			thereby, because of that, on that 											account, lit. by that, with thatmaggaphalāni 		n		nt.ac.pl		path and fruit, practice and resultpattuṃ 			v		inf			to attain, to reach, to arrive atna 				ind					notsakkuṇeyyuṃ. 		v		opt.3.pl		they could be able (to), would be abletasmā 			ind		adv			therefore, that is why, lit. from thatacalasaddhāya 		n		f.loc.s		when unshakeable confidence, faith like 										a mountainpatiṭṭhita-			pp					firmly grounded, well established, 											supportedkāle 				n		m.loc.s		when the timetāsaṃ 			pn		m.dat.pl		of those, of them, theirte 				pn		m.ac.pl		thosebhikkhū 			n		m.ac.pl		monksarahatta-			n					(state of) being worthy, enlightenmentpatte-				pp		m.ac.pl		attained, reached, gained, foundyeva 				ind		adv			just, only, even, even so, yet, alsodassesi.			v		aor.3.s		showed, exhibited, revealed, lit. caused 										to seeHaving seen their hustband with shaven head and wearing brown red robe, (their) mind could not become unified, because of that they could not be able to attain path and fruit. Therefore, in the time when unshakeable confidence was firmly grounded, he showed to them those monks as attained enlightenment.compound of 4 simple sentencesacalasaddhāya patiṭṭhitakāle – adv phrase of time13. Dhp 85 :	appakā te manussesu – ye janā pāra-gāmino,ath’āyaṃ itarā pajā – tīram’ev’ānudhāvatiappakā 			adj		m.n.pl		few things, few people, small amountte 				pn		m.n.pl		they, thosemanussesu 		n		m.loc.pl		in (among) peopleye 				pn		m.n.pl		those whojanā 				n		m.n.pl		the peoplepāragāmino		n		m.n.pl		who going beyond, cross over, to the 										other shoreatha-				ind		adv 			then; and also, butayaṃ 			pn		m.n.s			thisitarā 				pn		f.n.s			other, restpajā 				n		f.n.s			people, population, generation, mndtīram-			n		nt.ac.s		shore, bankeva-				ind		adv of sertainty	only, even, justanudhāvati			v		pr.3.s			run along, run up and down, run back 										and forthFew are those among people, who are going to the other shore, but there are another people just running along the shore. compound of two simple sentence14. KN-a Dh.p.1.1.1		sā vejjen’āgantvā “kīdisaṃ, bhadde”ti puṭṭhā “pubbe me akkhīni thokaṃ rujjiṃsu, idāni pana atirekataraṃ rujjantī”ti āha.sā 				pn		f.n.s			she	vejjena-			n		m.ins.s		with doctorāgantvā 			v		abs			having arrived, having returned“kīdisaṃ, 			adj		nt.n.s			of what kind? how is it? what is it like?bhadde”ti 			n		f.voc.s		madam, ma’am, good ladypuṭṭhā 			pp		f.n.s			asked, questioned“pubbe 			ind		adv of time		before, previously, formerly, in the past, 										in a previous lifeme 				pn		1.gen.s		my, mine			akkhīni 			n		nt.n.pl		eyesthokaṃ 			ind		adv of degree	a little, slightlyrujjiṃsu, 			v		aor.3.pl		ached, hurt, were soreidāni 				ind		adv of time		now, soon, at presentpana 				ind					moreover, and now, butatirekataraṃ		ind		adv of degree	very much, too much, to a high degree rujjantī”ti 			v		pr.3.pl		are hurtāha.				v		imperf.3.s		he saidShe came to doctor. He asked: “How is it, madam?” She said: “Previously my eyes ached slightly, but now they hurt too much.”compound of 4 simple sentenceskīdisaṃ, bhadde”ti – adv phrase of reason and consequence15. KN 8.82“yena yena subhikkhāni, sivāni abhayāni ca. tena puttaka gacchassu, mā sokāpahato bhavā”ti.“yena yena 		ind		adv of place	wherever, anywheresubhikkhāni, 		adj		nt.n.pl		with abundance of food, lit. with easy 										beggingsivāni 			adj		nt.n.pl		safe, happy, blessedabhayāni 			adj		nt.n.pl		safety, safe place, fearlessca.				ind					andtena 				ind		adv of place	thereputtaka 			n		m.voc.s		childgacchassu, 		v		imp.refl.2.s		you go by yourselfmā 				ind					may not be, do notsokāpahato 		adj		m.n.s			overcome by griefbhavā”ti.			v		imp.2.s		may you beWhere are abundance of food, safe and fearless, there you should go, child. May you not be overcome by sorrow! compound of two simple sentences“yena yena subhikkhāni, sivāni abhayāni ca. - adv phrase of place16. KN 14.137“yatth’eko labhate babbu, dutiyo tattha jāyati.“yatth’eko 			ind		adv of place	wherever, right wherelabhate 			v		pr.refl.3.s		one oneself gets, one oneself obtainsbabbu, 			n		m.n.s			catdutiyo 			n		m.n.s			secondtattha 			ind 		adv of place	there, in that placejāyati.			v		pr.3.s			is appearWherever one cat gets (something) there second will appear.simple sentence“yatth’eko labhate babbu – adv phrase of place17. KN 8.196yadā balākā suci-paṇḍara-cchadā, kāḷassa meghassa bhayena tajjitā.palehiti ālayam’ālayesinī, tadā nadī ajakaraṇī rameti maṃ.yadā 				ind		adv of time		when, wheneverbalākā 			n		f.n.s			cranesuci-				adj					clean, purepaṇḍara-			adj					pale, whitechadā, 			adj		f.n.s			with wingskāḷassa 			adj		m.gen.s		of dark, blackmeghassa 			n		m.gen.s		of cloud, rain-cloudbhayena 			n		nt.ins.s		by danger (of), peril (of)tajjitā.			pp		f.n.s			frightened (by), startled (by), spurred onpalehiti			v		fut.3.s		will run away, will escape, will flee ālayam-			n					roost, perch, haven	ālayesinī, 			n		f.n.s			who is seeking safetytadā 				ind		adv of time		then, at that timenadī 				n		f.n.s			riverajakaraṇī 			n		f.n.s			Ajakaraṇīrameti 			v		pr.3.s			gives delight, pleases, makes one happymaṃ.				pn		1.ac.s		meWhen the crane with pure white wings, frightened by the danger of the dark rain-cloud, he will run away seeking safety on the roost, at that time river Ajakaraṇī gives delight to me.compound of one simple sentences and one complex with first subordinate18. KN 14.150			 asantaṃ yo paggaṇhāti, asantaṃ c’ūpasevati.tam’eva ghāsaṃ kurute, byaggho sañjīvako yathā’ti.asantaṃ 			adj		m.ac.s		unvirtuous, wicked, badyo 				pn		m.n.s			whoeverpaggaṇhāti, 		v		pr.3.s			takes up, befriends, supportsasantaṃ  			adj		m.ac.s		unvirtuous, wicked, badca-				ind					andupasevati.			v		pr.3.s			associates (with), keeps company (with)tam’eva 			pn+ind	m.ac.s		that very, just him, only he, 		       ?										the very sameghāsaṃ 			n		m.ac.s		food, fodderkurute, 			v		pr.refl.3.s		one oneself does, one oneself makesbyaggho 			n		m.n.s			tiger, panthersañjīvako 			n		m.n.s			reviver, rescueryathā				ind					just as, likeWhoever befriends to the unvirtuous and keeps company with unvirtuous, that person makes himself into fodder, like a rescuer for the tiger.compound = complex sentences with first subordinate + simple sentence19. KN-a Dh.p.1.1.9saccaṃ kira tvaṃ, nanda, sambahulānaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ evaṃ ārocesi?saccaṃ 			ind		adv of sertainty	truly, reallykira 				ind		narrative		now, then, you know?tvaṃ, 			pnnanda, 			n		m.voc.s		Nanda		sambahulānaṃ 		adj		m.dat.pl		of many, numerous, plenty ofbhikkhūnaṃ 		n		m.dat.pl		of monksevaṃ 			ind					thus, this, like this, just as, suchārocesi			v		aor.2.s		told, informed, explained (to)It is true, Nanda, that you told this to many monks?simple sentence20. KN-a Dh.p.1.1.5tathāgatassa tattha hatthināgena upaṭṭhiyamānassa vasanabhāvo sakala-jambudīpe pākaṭo ahosi.tathāgatassa 		n		m.gen.s		of Such Become, Realisedtattha 			ind		adv of place	there, in that placehatthināgena 		n		m.ins.s		with mighty elephant, royal elephantupaṭṭhiyamānassa 	pprp		m.gen.s		of being attended (to), being waitedvasanabhāvo 		n		m.n.s			fact of livingsakala-			adj					whole, entirejambudīpe 			n		m.loc.s		in India, lit. rose-apple landpākaṭo 			adj		m.n.s			famous, well known, widespreadahosi.			v		aor.3.s		was, existed, becameThe fact of the Such Become living there, attended by mighty elephant, became well known in entire India.simple sentencesakala-jambudīpe – adv phrase of place
 Examples 161. KN 8.263yo vejayanta-pāsādaṃ, pādaṅguṭṭhena kampayiyo 				pn		m.n.s			who, whoevervejayanta-			n					Sakka’s Palace, lit. conqueringpāsādaṃ, 			n		m.ac.s		mansion, stately home, palace, building 										with pillarspādaṅguṭṭhena		n		nt.ins.s		with big toe kampayi			v		aor.3.s		shook, caused to shakeWho shook with big toe mansion of Sakka’s Palace,tādisaṃ bhikkhumāsajja, kaṇha dukkhaṃ nigacchasitādisaṃ 			adj		m.ac.s		such, like that (of), of such character, of 										such quality, the kind (of)bhikkhum-			n		m.ac.s		monkāsajja, 			v		ger			insulting, assaulting, attackingkaṇha 			n		m.voc.s		dark one, black one, evil onedukkhaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		discomfort, suffering, pain, unease, 									something unsatisfactory, problem, troublenigacchasi			v		pr.2.s			you suffer, undergo, fall (into)insulting such monk, o Dark One, you undergo suffering.2. KN 8.263 		 “evam’etaṃ mahāvīra, yathā samaṇa bhāsasi.ettha c’eke visīdanti, paṅkamh’iva jaraggavo.“evam’etaṃ		ind+pn			so it is, it is this, just like that, exactly like that		mahāvīra, 			n		m.voc.s		o great heroyathā 			ind					like, assamaṇa 			n		m.voc.s		Ascetic, epithet of the Buddhabhāsasi.			v		pr.2.s			you speak (about), talk (about)ettha 				ind					here, in this place, in this regardc’eke 			ind+pn				and some, some peoplevisīdanti, 			v		pr.3.pl		they sink down (in), sink (into), flounderpaṅkamha-			n		m.loc.s		in dirt, mud, mire, swampiva 				ind					like, asjaraggavo.			n		m.n.s			old bullSo it is, o Great Hero, it is as you speak, Ascetic! Here some people sink down like an old bull into the  mud.3. DN 14.14 mahāpadānasuttaṃ	 seyyathā’pi nāma suddhaṃ vatthaṃ apagatakāḷakaṃ samma’d-eva rajanaṃ paṭiggaṇheyya, evam’eva tesaṃ caturāsīti-pāṇasahassānaṃ tasmiṃyeva āsane virajaṃ vītamalaṃ dhammacakkhuṃ udapādiseyyathā’pi 		ind					just like, as if, imagine ifnāma 			ind					certainly, truly, for suresuddhaṃ 			adj		nt.n.s			clean, pure, whitevatthaṃ 			n		nt.n.s			cloth, clothes, robeapagatakāḷakaṃ 		adj		nt.n.s			without dirty marks, without stainssammadeva 		ind					thoroughly, completely, properly, rightlyrajanaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		dye, colourpaṭiggaṇheyya, 		v		opt.3.s		could take, accept, receiveevameva 			ind					similarly, in the same way, so too, just sotesaṃ 			pn		m.dat.pl		for thosecaturāsīti-			adj					eighty four (84)pāṇa-				n					being, living being, lit. breathsahassānaṃ 		adj		m.dat.pl		for one thousands (1000)tasmiṃyeva 		ind					in that very, in that exactāsane 			n		nt.loc.s		in seatvirajaṃ 			adj		nt.n.s			pure, stainless, untaintedvītamalaṃ 			adj		nt.n.s			stainless, spotless, without taint, blemish 									freedhammacakkhuṃ 	n		nt.n.s			insight into the nature of reality, spiritual 										insight, understanding of the way things 										are, lit. Dhamma eyeudapādi			v		aor.3.s		arose, sprung upJust like a white cloth, without stains, could completely take the dye, in the same way spiritual insight arose for those eighty four thousands of beings, in that exact seat.4. KN 8.228sare hatthehi bhañjitvā, katvāna kuṭim’acchisaṃ, tena me sarabhaṅgo’ti, nāmaṃ sammutiyā ahu.“sare 				n		nt.ac.pl		reeds (used for making arrows)hatthehi 			n		m.ins.pl		with handsbhañjitvā, 			v		abs			having broken, having destroyedkatvāna 			v		abs			having done, having madekuṭim-			n		f.ac.s			hutacchisaṃ.			v		aor.3.pl		waited, remained, lit. sitedtena 				ind					thereby, because of that, on that 											account, lit. by that, with thatme 				pn		1.gen.s		mysarabhaṅgo’ti, 		n		m.n.s			Sarabhaṅga; ‘reed breaking’nāmaṃ 			n		nt			namesammutiyā			n		f.ins.s		by common opinion, popular idea, 											general agreement, general consensus 	    ahu.				v		aor.3.s		one was, it was, there wasI broke reeds with hands, made a hut and remained (there), because of that by general agreement my name was the Sarabhaṅga ‘reed breaking’ 5. DN 23.5		 labheyya nu kho so coro coraghātesu — ‘āgamentu tāva bhavanto coraghātā, amukasmiṃ me gāme vā nigame vā mittāmaccā ñātisālohitā, yāvāhaṃ tesaṃ uddisitvā āgacchāmī’ti, udāhu vippalapantasseva coraghātā sīsaṃ chindeyyun”ti?labheyya 			v		opt.3.s		would get, could receive, obtainsnu kho 			ind					does? is? would?so 				pn		m.n.s			he, thatcoro 				n		m.n.s			thiefcoraghātesu — 		n		m.loc.pl		in executioners‘āgamentu 			v		imp.3.pl		they may wait, must expecttāva 				ind					that much, as long as, to that extent, 										until, at leastbhavanto 			n		m.n.pl		masters, sirs, good mencoraghātā, 			n		m.n.pl		executionersamukasmiṃ 		pn		m.loc.s		in that, such and such (person or place)me 				pn		1,gen.s		mygāme				n		m.loc.s		in village, hamlet, collection of houses	 vā 				ind					ornigame 			n		m.loc.s		in town, market townvā 				ind					ormittāmaccā 		n		m.n.pl		friend and colleagues, friends and 											companionsñātisālohitā			n		m.n.pl		family and blood relativesyāva-				ind					as long as, as far as, up to, untilahaṃ 			pn		1.n.s			Itesaṃ 			pn		m.dat.pl		to themuddisitvā 			v		abs			having seen, having visited, 												lit. having looked upāgacchāmī’ti,		v		pr.1.s			I come back, arriveudāhu 			ind					or (part 2 of a question)vippalapaṃ-		adj		m.ac.s		talkative, who are wailingtassa-			pn		m.gen.s		of that, hiseva 				ind					only, just, so, evencoraghātā 			n		m.n.pl		executionerssīsaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		headchindeyyun”ti?		v		opt.3.pl		they could cut, cut off, severWhould that thief get from the executioners: “In such and such village or town there are my friends and companions, family and blood relatives. (Please) may good executioners wait until I have visited them, then I will come back. Or executioners just could cut off the head of that talkative (thief)?”6. DHP 329 nāgavaggo		 no ce labhetha nipakaṃ sahāyaṃ, saddhiṃcaraṃ sādhuvihāri-dhīraṃ, rājā’va raṭṭhaṃ vijitaṃ pahāya, eko care mātaṅg’araññe’va nāgo.“no 				ind					notce 				ind					iflabhetha 			v		opt.3.s		one oneself would get, one oneself 										would acquire, one oneself should obtainnipakaṃ 			adj		m.ac.s		intelligent, wise, discerningsahāyaṃ,			n		m.ac.s		friend, companion, fellow travellersaddhiṃ-			ind					together (with), withcaraṃ 			adj		m.ac.s		walking, going, roaming, livingsādhuvihāri- 		adj					who lives well, clean livingdhīraṃ.			adj		m.ac.s		stable, constant, reliable, firmrājā-				n		m.n.s			king			iva 				ind					likeraṭṭhaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		country, land, kingdom, realmvijitaṃ 			adj		nt.ac.s		conquered, subjugatedpahāya,			v		ger			leaving behind, giving up, abandoningeko 				adj		m.n.s			alonecare 				v		opt.3.s		should go about, should leads (one’s 										life), should conduct oneselfmātaṅga-			n					elephantaraññe-			n		nt.loc.s		in forest, wood, wildsiva 				ind					likenāgo.				n		m.n.s			tusker, bull elephant, mighty beastIf one could not find an intelligent friend, fellow traveller, who stable and lives well, he should walk alone, like the king giving up the conquered kingdom, like the mighty beast in elephant’s forest.7. KN-a Ja 181evaṃ mahāsatto khuddaka-makkhikāya pivana-mattampi lohitaṃ anuppādetvā satta-rājāno palāpetvā kaniṭṭha-bhātaraṃ apaloketvā kāme pahāya isipabbajjaṃ pabbajitvā abhiññā ca samāpattiyo ca nibbattetvā jīvitapariyosāne brahmalokūpago ahosi.evaṃ 			ind					thus, this, like this, just as, suchmahāsatto 			n		m.n.s			great beingkhuddaka-			adj					small, minute, tinymakkhikāya 		n		f			fly, lit. smearerpivana-			n					drink, drinkingmattam’pi 			adj		nt.ac.s		just as many as, as much as, a measure 									of, consisting of, only as much aslohitaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		bloodanuppādetvā 		v		abs			having not produced, having not given 										rise to, lit. caused to appearsatta- 			adj					seven					rājāno 			n		m.ac.pl		officers, policemen, lit. king’s men		palāpetvā 			v		abs			having put to flight, having made fleekaniṭṭha-			adj					youngest, last bornbhātaraṃ 			n		m.ac.s		brotherapaloketvā 			v		abs			having obtained permission (from), 								having given notice (to), lit. having looked up (to)kāme 			n		m.ac.pl		pleasures, sensual pleasurespahāya 			v		ger			leaving behind, giving up, abandoningisipabbajjaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		non-Buddhist asceticpabbajitvā 			v		abs			having ordained, having renounced the 										household lifeabhiññā 			n		f.ac.pl		psychic powersca 				ind					andsamāpattiyo 		n		f.ac.pl		attainments, meditation attainmentsca 				ind					andnibbattetvā 		v		abs			having brought about, having caused to 										come forth, having completed, lit. having 									caused to bejīvitapariyosāne 		n		nt.loc.s		in the end of life, end of life spanbrahmalokūpago 	adj		m.n.s			reborn in the world of the gods, headed 										towards Brahma’s realmahosi.			v		aor.3.s		was, existed, becameLike this great being did not cause to appear the blood even as many as small fly can drink, made flee seven kings, obtained permission from his youngest brother, abandoning sensual pleasures he ordained as non-Buddhist ascetic, then he obtained psychic powers and meditation attainments, and after death was reborn in the Brahma’s realm.8. KN-a Ud,2.8kosalarājā mahantena balenāgantvā bārāṇasiṃ gahetvā taṃ rājānaṃ māretvā tassa aggamahesiṃ attano aggamahesiṃ akāsi.kosalarājā 			n		m.n.s			king of Kosalamahantena 		adj		m.ins.s		with great, large, powerful, grand, 											mighty, vast, extensivebalena-			n		m.ins.s		with army, military forceāgantvā 			v		abs			having arrived, having returnedbārāṇasiṃ 			n		f.ac.s			City of Varanassigahetvā 			v		abs			having taken control (of), having seized 										powertaṃ				pn		m.ac.s		that, he rājānaṃ 			n		m.ac.s		king (object)māretvā 			v		abs			having caused to kill, having caused to 										murder, having had someone killedtassa 			pn		m.gen.s		hisaggamahesiṃ 		n		f.ac.s			first queen, first wife of the kingattano 			adj		m.dat.s		for self, for oneself, to oneselfaggamahesiṃ 		n		f.ac.s			first queen, first wife of the kingakāsi.			v		aor.3.s		did, madeKing of Kosala arrived with a great force, having taken control of Varanassi, he caused to kill that king and made his first queen his own.9. KN-a Dh.p.,1.5.11eko kuṭumbiko ekassa therassa vihāraṃ katvā taṃ tattha viharantaṃ catūhi paccayehi upaṭṭhahi.eko 				adj		m.n.s			one, a certainkuṭumbiko 			n		m.n.s			head of a family, householder, 											family manekassa 			adj		m.dat.s		to one, a certaintherassa 			n		m.dat.s		to elder monkvihāraṃ 			n		m.ac.s		monasterykatvā 			v		abs			having done, having madetaṃ				pn		m.ac.s		that, him tattha 			ind					there, in that placeviharantaṃ 		prp		m.ac.s		living, staying, remaining, continuingcatūhi 			adj		m.ins.pl		with fourpaccayehi 			n		m.ins.pl		with supports, requisitesupaṭṭhahi.			v		aor.3.s		attended, served, providedA certain householder built a monastery for a certain elder monk, a householder provided (monk) who living there with four requisites.10. Vin 4, 1.8caratha, bhikkhave, cārikaṃ bahujana-hitāya bahujanasukhāya lokānukampāya atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussānaṃ.caratha, 			v		imp.2.pl		you walk, wander, gocārikaṃ 			n		f.ac.s			walking tour, walking journeybahujana-			n					multitude, many people, mass of peoplehitāya 			n		nt.dat.s		for welfare, good, benefit, blessingbahujanasukhāya 	n		nt.dat.s		for the happiness of many peoplelokānukampāya 		n		f.dat.s		for the compassion for the worldatthāya 			n		m.dat.s		for benefit, profit, good, welfare, goalhitāya 			n		nt.dat.s		for welfare, good, benefit, blessingsukhāya 			n		nt.dat.s		for ease, comfort, happiness, pleasuredevamanussānaṃ.	n		m.gen.pl		of gods and menO monks, you should travel the benefit of mass of people, for the happiness of many people, out of the compassion for the world, for the welfare, for the blessing, for the happiness of gods and men.11. DN 5.2na arahati bhavaṃ kūṭadanto samaṇaṃ gotamaṃ dassanāya upasaṅkamituṃ. samaṇo tveva gotamo arahati bhavantaṃ kūṭadantaṃ dassanāya upasaṅkamituṃ .na 				ind					notarahati 			v		pr.3.s			should, ought (to), suitable (for), befittingbhavaṃ 			n		m.n.s			respectable person, honourable personkūṭadanto 			n		m.n.s			Kūṭadanta; ‘crooked tooth’samaṇaṃ 			n		m.ac.s		ascetic, renunciant, holy man, monk, 									recluse, lit. who makes an effort, calm onegotamaṃ 			n		m.ac.s		Gotamadassanāya 			n		nt.dat.s		to see, in order to see, for the purpose of 									seeingupasaṅkamituṃ. 		v		inf			to approach, to visit, to go (to)samaṇo 			n		m.nom.s		ascetic, renunciant, holy man, monk, 									recluse, lit. who makes an effort, calm onetv-eva 			ind					however, but, rather, rather than		gotamo 			n		m.nom.s		Gotamaarahati 			v		pr.3.s			should, ought (to), suitable (for), befittingbhavantaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		respectable person, honourable personkūṭadantaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		Kūṭadanta; ‘crooked tooth’dassanāya 			n		nt.dat.s		to see, in order to see, for the purpose of 									seeingupasaṅkamituṃ 		v		inf			to approach, to visit, to go (to)Respectable person ‘Crooked Tooth’ should not approach recluse Gotama in order to see, but recluse Gotama should approach respectable person ‘Crooked Tooth’ in order to see.12. DN 23.20atha kho pāyāsi rājañño uttaraṃ māṇavaṃ āmantāpetvā etadavoca — “saccaṃ kira tvaṃ, tāta uttara, dānaṃ datvā evaṃ anuddisasi — ‘imināhaṃ dānena pāyāsiṃ rājaññameva imasmiṃ loke samāgacchiṃ, mā parasmin”ti?atha kho 			ind					then, and then, after thatpāyāsi 			n		m.n.s			Pāyāsirājañño 			n		m.n.s			man of the ruling class, young khattiyauttaraṃ			n		m.ac.s		Uttaramāṇavaṃ 			n		m.ac.s		young man, young gentleman, young 										Brahmanāmantāpetvā 		v		abs			having sent (for), having had summonedetadavoca 			v		aor.3.s		one said this“saccaṃ 			ind					truly, reallykira 				ind		narrative		now, then, you know?tvaṃ, 			pn		2.n.s			youtāta 				n		m.voc.s		father, brother, (respectful address)uttara, 			n		m.voc.s		Uttaradānaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		gift, giving, offering, charitydatvā 			v		abs			having given, having offered, having 										donatedevaṃ 			ind					thus, this, like this, just as, suchanuddisasi 			v		pr.2.s			points out, remarks‘imina-			pn		m.ins.s		by thisahaṃ 			pn		1.n.s			Idānena 			n		nt.ins.s		by gift, giving, offering, charity			pāyāsiṃ 			n		m.ac.s		Pāyāsirājaññam-			n		m.ac.s		man of the ruling class, young khattiyaeva 				ind					only, just, so, even		imasmiṃ 			pn		m.loc.s		in thisloke 				n		m.loc.s		in world, plane of existencesamāgacchiṃ		v		aor.1.s		I united (with), associated (with), 											meet (with), connected (with)mā 				ind					do not, may one not, don’t letparasmin”ti?		adj		m.loc.s		in next (world), next (life), after (life)And then young khattiya Pāyāsi had summoned young gentleman Uttara and said this: “Is it true, father Uttara, that by giving charity you remarked thus: “By this charity may I meet with young khattiya Pāyāsi only in this life not in the next.”13. DN 23.10		abhijānāsi no tvaṃ, rājañña, divā seyyaṃ upagato supinakaṃ passitā ārāmarāmaṇeyyakaṃ vanarāmaṇeyyakaṃ bhūmirāmaṇeyyakaṃ pokkharaṇīrāmaṇeyyakan”ti?abhijānāsi 			v		pr.2.s			is aware (of), is conscious (of)no 				ind		inter			surely? didn’t you? definitelytvaṃ, 			n		m.n.s			yourājañña, 			n		m.voc.s		man of the ruling class, young khattiyadivā 				ind					by day, during the dayseyyaṃ 			n		f.ac.s			sleep, rest, sleeping postureupagato 			pp		m.n.s			taken, undertaken, underwentsupinakaṃ 			n		nt.ac.s		dreampassitā 			pp		m.n.pl		seen						ārāmarāmaṇeyyakaṃ 		n	nt.ac.s		delightful park, lovely grovevanarāmaṇeyyakaṃ		n	nt.ac.s		delightful wood, wonderful forestbhūmirāmaṇeyyakaṃ		n	nt.ac.s		delightful place, lovely area, wonderful 										regionpokkharaṇīrāmaṇeyyakaṃ	n	nt.ac.s		delightful pool, lovely lotus pond		Are you aware, young khattiya, (when you) taking rest during the day, you see a dream with delightful park, wonderful forest, lovely area and delightful lotus pond?14. MN 8.1		so vata, cunda, attanā palipa-palipanno paraṃ palipa-palipannaṃ uddharissatīti n’etaṃ ṭhānaṃ vijjati. so 				pn		m.n.s			he, thatvata				ind					certainly, surely, indeedcunda, 			n		m.voc.s		o Cunda		attanā 			n		m.ins.s		with oneself, by oneselfpalipa-			n					mud, mire, marsh, swamppalipanno 			pp		m.n.s			stuck (in), immersed (in), sunk (into)paraṃ 			pn		m.ac.s		other, another (person)palipa-			n					mud, mire, marsh, swamppalipannaṃ 		pp		m.ac.s		stuck (in), immersed (in), sunk (into)uddharissatī’ti 		v		fut.3.s		will pull up, lift up, raise, removen’etaṃ 			pn		m.n.s			this is notṭhānaṃ 			n		nt.n.s			reason, grounds, basis, causevijjati				v		pr.3.s			exists (in), is found (in), is present (in)Indeed, o Cunda, it is impossible that one himself stuck in mud should pull up another person who (also) stuck in mud.so vata, cunda, attanā a-palipa-palipanno paraṃ palipa-palipannaṃ uddharissatī’ti ṭhānam’etaṃ vijjatiso 				pn		m.n.s			he, thatvata				ind					certainly, surely, indeedcunda, 			n		m.voc.s		o Cunda		attanā 			n		m.ins.s		with oneself, by oneselfa-palipapalipanno	pp		m.n.s			not stuck inmud, immersed in mire, sunk 									into the swampparaṃ 			pn		m.ac.s		other, another (person)palipa-			n					mud, mire, marsh, swamppalipannaṃ 		pp		m.ac.s		stuck (in), immersed (in), sunk (into)uddharissatī’ti 		v		fut.3.s		will pull up, lift up, raise, removeṭhānaṃ- 			n		nt.n.s			reason, grounds, basis, causeetaṃ 				pn		m.n.s			thisvijjati				v		pr.3.s			exists (in), is found (in), is present (in)Indeed, o Cunda, it is possible that one himself not stuck in mud should pull up another person who (also) stuck in mud.15. MN 13			tassa ce, bhikkhave, kulaputtassa evaṃ uṭṭhahato ghaṭato vāyamato te bhogā n’ābhinipphajjanti. “tassa 			pn		m.gen.s		when thatce, 				ind					ifkulaputtassa 		n		m.gen.s		when son of a good family, respectable 										young man, young gentlemanevaṃ 			ind					thus, this, like this, just as, suchuṭṭhahato 			prp		m.gen.s		when getting up, arousing oneself, 										lit. standing upghaṭato 			prp		m.gen.s		when trying, striving, making an effortvāyamato 			prp		m.gen.s		when making an effort, striving, exerting 										oneselfte 				pn		m.n.pl		those			bhogā 			n		m.n.pl		wealth, possessions, property, richesn’ābhinipphajjanti	v		pr.3.pl		are accomplished, are successfully 										attained, are ariseIf those wealth not successfully coming, while young gentleman arousing oneself,  striving and making an effort.so socati kilamati paridevati urattāḷiṃ kandati, sammohaṃ āpajjati, moghaṃ vata me uṭṭhānaṃ, aphalo vata me vāyāmo’ti.so 				pn		m.n.s			hesocati 			v		pr.3.s			sorrows, grieves, mournskilamati 			v		pr.3.s			grows tired, gets fatiguedparidevati			v		pr.3.s			mourns, laments, wailsurattāḷiṃ 			ind					beating one’s breastkandati, 			v		pr.3.s			cries, weeps, wailssammohaṃ 		n		m.ac.s		confusion, delusion, bewildermentāpajjati			v		pr.3.s			experiences, suffersmoghaṃ 			adj		nt.n.s			useless, stupid, in vain, a wastevata 				ind					oh! oh no! oh dear!me 				pn		1.gen.s		myuṭṭhānaṃ, 			n		nt.n.s			effort, exertion, initiative, activity, aphalo 			adj		m.n.s			useless, empty, in vain, lit. fruitlessvata 				ind					oh! oh no! oh dear!me 				pn		1.gen.s		myvāyāmo’ti.			n		m.n.s			effort, striving, exertion, endeavourHe grieves, grows tired, mourns, wails beating his breast, experiences bewilderment. “Oh dear! My effort is useless! Oh no! My exertion is fruitless!”16. DN 9.6“addhā kho, bhante, evaṃ sante tassa purisassa sappāṭihīrakataṁ bhāsitaṃ sampajjatī”ti.“addhā 			ind					most certainly! for sure! definitely!kho, 				ind					indeed, surely, certainly, trulybhante, 			n		m.voc.s		sir, lord, reverendevaṃ 			ind					thus, this, like this, just as, suchsante 			prp		m.loc.s		when existing, beingtassa 			pn		m.gen.s		of that			purisassa			n		m.gen.s		of person sappāṭihīrakataṁ 	adj		nt.n.s			well grounded, well founded, with sound 									basisbhāsitaṃ 			n		nt.n.s			saying, speech, statement, utterance, 										talk, words, lit. what was saidsampajjatī”ti.		v		pr.3.s			happens to be, turns out to beMost certainly, reverend! thus, when being like this, words of that person turns out to be well grounded.17.  SN 35.132 lohiccasuttaṃ “yagghe! bhavaṃ jāneyya, samaṇo mahākaccāno brāhmaṇānaṃ mante ekaṃsena apavadati, paṭikkosatī”ti?“yagghe! 			ind					come on! see now!bhavaṃ 			n		m.n.s			master, sirjāneyya, 			v		opt.3.s		should know, could understandsamaṇo 			n		m.n.s			ascetic, renunciant, holy man, monk, 										reclusemahākaccāno 		n		m.n.s			Mahākaccānabrāhmaṇānaṃ 		n		m.gen.s		of Brahmans, priestsmante 			n		m.ac.pl		mantras, scriptures, sacred hymns,     										Veda						      ekaṃsena 			ind					certainly, definitely, absolutely	      apavadati, 			v		pr.3.s			slanders, denigrates, disrespectspaṭikkosatī”ti?		v		pr.3.s			rejects, refuses to accept, disses, 											disdainsSee now! Master should know that recluse Mahākaccāna absolutely slandersa and rejects  sacred hymns of the Brahmans.
 Examples 17  1. KN-a Dh.p.2.17.3puṇṇo theraṃ disvā’va kasiṃ ṭhapetvā pañcapatiṭṭhitena theraṃ vanditvā “dantakaṭṭhena attho bhavissatī”ti dantakaṭṭhaṃ kappiyaṃ katvā adāsi.puṇṇo 			adj	m.n.s		“full, complete”, Puṇṇotheraṃ 			n	m.ac.s	elder, senior monk, lit. old mandisvā-			v	abs		having seen, having understood, having foundeva				ind 			only, just, so, evenkasiṃ 			n	f.ac.s		ploughing, farming, agricultureṭhapetvā 			v	abs		having placed aside, having put downpañca-patiṭṭhitena 	pp	m.ins.s	with 5 fold prostration or venerationtheraṃ 			n	m.ac.s	elder, senior monk, lit. old manvanditvā 			v	abs		having bowed, having paid respect, having honoured“dantakaṭṭhena 		n	nt.ins.s	toothbrush, lit. tooth stickattho				n	m.n.s		benefit, profit, good, welfare, goal 	bhavissatī”ti 		v	fut.3.s	could be, should be, will bedantakaṭṭhaṃ 		n	nt.ac.s	toothbrush, lit. tooth stickkappiyaṃ 			adj	nt.ac.s	suitable, appropriatekatvā 			v	abs		having done, having madeadāsi.			v	aor.3.s	gavePuṇṇo just having seen an elder, placed aside ploughing, paid respect to him with five fold prostration. “Toothbrush will be useful!” Having made suitable toothbrush, he offered it. 2. KN-a Dh.p.1.5.3satthā mūlasiriṃ āmantetvā “jānāsi etan”ti pucchitvā “na jānāmī”ti vutte, “pitā te ānandaseṭṭhī”ti vatvā asaddahantaṃ “ānandaseṭṭhi puttassa te pañca mahānidhiyo ācikkhāhī”ti ācikkhāpetvā saddahāpesi.satthā 			n	m.n.s		The teachermūlasiriṃ 			n	m.ac.s	Mūlasiri, “Rooted in prosperity”āmantetvā 			v	abs		having invited, having called, having summoned“jānāsi 			v	pr.2.s		you know, understandetan”ti 			n	m.ac.s	thispucchitvā 			v	abs		having asked, having enquired, having questioned“na 				ind			notjānāmī”ti  			v	pr.2.s		I know, understandvutte, 			pp	m.loc.s	when said, told, spoken, mentioned			“pitā 				n	m.n.s		fatherte				pn	2.gen.s	your ānandaseṭṭhī”ti 		n	m.n.s		Ānandaseṭṭhī, “Happy wealthy man”vatvā 			v	abs		having saidasaddahantaṃ 		prp	m.ac.s	not believing						“ānandaseṭṭhi 		n	m.n.s		Ānandaseṭṭhī, “Happy wealthy man”puttassa 			n	m.dat.s	to son, childte 				pn	2.gen.s	yourpañca 			adj	-.ac.pl	five (5)mahānidhiyo 		n	f.ac.pl	grate treasure, trove, hoard, lit. put down	ācikkhāhī”ti 		v	imp.2.s	tell about, describe, point out, teachācikkhāpetvā 		v	abs		having made show, having made tellsaddahāpesi.		v	aor 		caused to believe, convincedThe Teacher summoned the Mūlasiri. “Do you know this (man) ?” he asked; “I don’t now” he said; “Yor father Ānandaseṭṭhī” he said to not believing; “Describe five grate treasure to your son” having caused to show, he convinced.3. Dhp 85 :	appakā te manussesu – ye janā pāra-gāmino,ath’āyaṃ itarā pajā – tīram’ev’ānudhāvatiappakā 			adj	m.n.pl	few things, few people, small amountte 				pn	m.n.pl	they, thosemanussesu 		n	m.loc.pl	in (among) peopleye 				pn	m.n.pl	those whojanā 				n	m.n.pl	the peoplepāragāmino		n	m.n.pl	who going beyond, cross over, to the 										other shoreatha-				ind	adv 		then; and also, butayaṃ 			pn	f.n.s		this, theitarā 				pn	f.n.s		other, restpajā 				n	f.n.s		people, population, generation, mndtīram-			n	nt.ac.s	shore, bankeva-				ind	adv 		only, even, justanudhāvati			v	pr.3.s		run along, run up and down, run back 										and forthFew are those among people, who are going to the other shore, but the rest of the people just running along the shore. 4. KN 8.261	anuddhato acapalo, nipako saṃvutindriyo.sobhati paṃsukūlena, sīho’va girigabbhare.anuddhato  		adj	m.n.s		calm, subdued, unruffled, not agitatedacapalo, 			adj	m.n.s		steady, steadfast, not shakingnipako 			adj	m.n.s		intelligent, wise, discerningsaṃvutindriyo.		adj	m.n.s		with mind under control, with senses retrainedsobhati 			v	pr.3.s		shines, radiates, looks beautifulpaṃsukūlena, 		adj	m.ins.s	with a robe from a rubbish heap, wearing a rag robesīho’va 			n	m.n.s		like a liongiri-gabbhare.		n	m.loc.s	in mountain caveCalm, steadfast, intelligent, with senses retrained, he shines even wearing a rag robe, like a lion in a mountain cave.5. KN 8.176	yodha koci manussesu, parapāṇāni hiṃsati.asmā lokā paramhā ca, ubhayā dhaṃsate naro.yo-				pn	m.n.s		whoeveridha 				ind			here, now, in this worldkoci 				pn	m.n.s		someone, anyone, some, whoevermanussesu, 		n	m.loc.pl	among peoplepara-pāṇāni 		n	nt.ac.pl	another living beingshiṃsati.			v	pr.3.s		harms, hurts, injuresasmā 			pn	m.abl.s	from this	lokā 				n	m.abl.s	from worldparamhā 			adj	m.abl.s	from other, anotherca, 				ind			andubhayā 			pn	m.abl.s	from both, referring to two thingsdhaṃsate 			v	pr.refl.3.s	one deprives oneself (from), one falls (from)naro.				n	m.n.s		man, personWhoever here among people harms another living beings, that person falls down from both (welfare), in this world and another.6. Dhp 64	yāvajīvam’pi ce bālo, paṇḍitaṃ payirupāsati.na so dhammaṃ vijānāti, dabbī sūparasaṃ yathā.yāvajīvaṃ-			ind			for whole life, lit. as long as lifeapi 				ind			even, even thence 				ind			ifbālo, 				n	m.n.s		fool, ignorant, immature personpaṇḍitaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	sage, intelligent person, wise manpayirupāsati.		v	pr.3.s		associates closely (with), attends closely (to), 										lit. sits closely aroundna 				ind			notso 				pn	m.n.s		hedhammaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	Teaching, truth, realityvijānāti, 			v	pr.3.s		comprehends, understands, recognises, distinguishes, 							is aware (of)dabbī 			n	f.n.s		wooden spoon, spoon, ladlesūparasaṃ 		n	m.ac.s	taste of soup, flavour of curryyathā.			ind			like, asIf a fool even for his whole life associates closely with a wise man, he is not understanding the truth, like a wooden spoon (is not understanding) the taste of a soup.7. KN-a Dh.p.1.5.3atha naṃ piṇḍāya caritvā jīvituṃ samatthakāle sā kapālakaṃ hatthe ṭhapetvā, “tāta, mayaṃ taṃ nissāya mahādukkhaṃ pattā, idāni na sakkomi taṃ posetuṃ, imasmiṃ nagare kapaṇaddhikādīnaṃ paṭiyattabhattāni atthi, tattha bhikkhāya caritvā jīvāhī”ti taṃ vissajjesi.atha 				ind			then, also, and so, after thatnaṃ 				n	m.ac.s	himpiṇḍāya 			n	m.dat.s	for almscaritvā 			v	abs		having walked, having wandered, having livedjīvituṃ 			v	inf		to live, to remain alive, to survivesamatthakāle 		n	m.loc.s	in time when he was able, strongsā 				pn	f.n.s		shekapālakaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	beggars bowlhatthe 			n	m.ac.pl	handsṭhapetvā			v	abs		having placed, having put“tāta, 				n	m.voc.s	brother, sonmayaṃ 			pn	1.n.pl		wetaṃ 				pn	2.ac.s	younissāya 			v	ger		supporting, helpingmahādukkhaṃ 		n	nt.ac.s	great discomfort, suffering, pain, troublepattā				pp	m.n.pl	attained, reached, gained, foundidāni 				ind			now, at presentna 				ind			notsakkomi 			v	pr.1.s		I am able (to)taṃ 				pn	2.ac.s	youposetuṃ, 			v	inf		to support, to looks after, to take care (of)imasmiṃ 			pn	nt.loc.s	in thisnagare 			n	nt.loc.s	in town, city, fortified townkapaṇaddhika-		n			poor traveller, trampadīnaṃ 			adj	nt.dat.pl	to etc, and so on	paṭiyatta-			pp			prepared, arrangedbhattāni 			n	nt.n.pl	mealsatthi, 				v	pr.3.pl	there are, there existtattha 			ind			there, in that placebhikkhāya 			n	f.dat.s	for alms-food, begged foodcaritvā 			v	abs		having walked, having wandered, having livedjīvāhī”ti 			v	imp.2.s	you live, survivetaṃ				pn	m.ac.s	him vissajjesi			v	aor.3.s	sent away, ejected, got rid (of), kicked outThen, in time when he was able to live on wandering for alms, she placed beggars bowl in (his) hands. “Dear son, supporting you, we gained great trouble. Now I am not able to take care of you. In this town there are meals, arranged for tramps and so on. There you must survive begging food.” And she sent him away.8. KN-a Ja 50tasmiṃ samaye bārāṇasivāsino devatāmaṅgalikā honti, devatā namassanti, bahū ajeḷakakukkuṭabhūkarādayo vadhitvā nānappakārehi pupphagandhehi ceva maṃsalohitehi ca balikammaṃ karonti.tasmiṃ samaye 		idiom		loc.s		then, on that occasion, at that timebārāṇasivāsino 		adj		m.n.pl	people of Varanassidevatāmaṅgalikā 	adj		m.n.pl	holding festivals, celebrating, worshipping the 									devashonti, 			v		pr.3.pl	they aredevatā 			n		f.ac.pl	deities, godsnamassanti, 		v		pr.3.pl	worship, venerate, honourbahū 				adj		m.ac.pl	many things, much, a lotajeḷaka-			n				goats and sheepkukkuṭasūkara-		n				chickens and pigsādayo 			adj		m.ac.pl	etc, and so on			vadhitvā 			v		abs		having killed, having slaughterednānappakārehi 		adj		m.ins.s	with various, different pupphagandhehi 	n		m.ins.s	with floral scentceva 				ind				and even, as well asmaṃsalohitehi 		n		nt.ins.s	with flesh and bloodca 				ind				andbalikammaṃ 		n		nt.ac.s	sacrificial offering, oblation to god(s)karonti.			v		pr.3.pl	they make, doAt that time people of Varanassi were holding festivals for the devas. They worshiped deities. They killed many goats and sheep, chickens and pigs and so on. They made sacrifice to gods with various floral scent and even with flesh and blood. 9. Dhp 81	 selo yathā ekaghano, vātena na samīrati.evaṃ nindā-pasaṃsāsu, na samiñjanti paṇḍitā.selo 				n		m.n.s		rock, stoneyathā 			ind				like, asekaghano, 			adj		m.n.s		solid, densevātena 			n		m.ins.s	by windna 				ind				notsamīrati.			v		pr.3.s		moves, shakesevaṃ 			ind				thus, this, like this, just as, suchnindā-			n				blame, criticism, fault-finding, disgracepasaṃsāsu, 		n		f.loc.pl	praise, approval, commendationna 				ind				notsamiñjanti 			v		pr.3.pl	move, shakepaṇḍitā.			n		m.n.pl	sages, intelligent people, wise menLike a solid stone does not shake because of the wind, same way the wise people do not shake because of the blames and praises.10. KN-a Dh.p.,1.1.8		imehi lakkhaṇehi samannāgato nāma agāramajjhe vasanto rājā hoti cakkavattī, pabbajanto loke vivaṭṭacchado sabbaññubuddho hoti.imehi 			pn	m.ins.pl	with these, with theselakkhaṇehi 			n	nt.ins.pl	with auspicious signs, birthmarks, prognosticative 								markssamannāgato 		adj	m.n.s		possessing, endowed (with), having, nāma 			ind			certainly, truly, for sureagāra-majjhe 		adj	m.loc.s	in the middle of householders, among housholders							lit: in the middle of the housevasanto 			prp	m.n.s		living, stayingrājā 				n	m.n.s		kinghoti 				v	pr.3.s		iscakkavattī, 			n	m.n.s		universal monarch; wheel turning emperor.pabbajanto 		prp	m.n.s		ordaining, renouncing (the household life)loke 				n	m.loc.s	in the worldvivaṭṭacchado 		adj	m.n.s		who rolls back the veil (of illusion)sabbaññu-			adj			omniscient, all knowing, complete understandingbuddho 			adj	m.n.s		awakened, woke up, understoodhoti.				v	pr.3.s		he isCertainly one possessing those birthmarks, staying in the midle of the house, he will be the king, wheel turning emperor. Renouncing the household life he will be the all knowing awakened one.
 Examples 181. JAa 21ambho, rukkha, pubbe tvaṃ olambakaṃ otārento viya ujukam’eva phalāni pātesi	ambho, 			ind			hey! yo!pubbe 			ind			before, previously, formerly, in the past, in a previous 							lifetvaṃ 				pn	2.n.s		youolambakaṃ 		n	nt.ac.s	plumb lineotārento 			prp	m.n.s		hanging downviya 				ind			like, asujukam-			adj	m.ac.s	straight, upright, straight up, straight downeva				ind			only, just, so, evenphalāni 			n	nt.ac.pl	fruitspātesi			v	aor.3.s	dropped, threw down, lit. caused to fallHey! Tree! Previously you only dropped fruits straight down, like a plumb line hanging down.2. KN-a Dh.p.1.1.1		 upakaṭṭhāya pavāraṇāya sabbeva saha paṭisambhidāhi arahattaṃ pāpuṇiṃsuupakaṭṭhāya 		adj	f.loc.s	when approaching, near, lit. dragging towards	pavāraṇāya 		n	f.loc.s	when (vinaya) invitation ceremony at the end of the 								rains 	retreatsabb’eva 			pn	m.n.pl	all justsaha 				ind			with, together (with), accompanied (by)paṭisambhidāhi 		n	f.ins.pl	with penetrating insights, analytical understandingsarahattaṃ			n	nt.ac.s	(state of) being worthy, enlightenment pāpuṇiṃsu			v	aor.3.pl	they reached, arrived, attained, experiencedNear the invitation ceremony at the end of the rains retreat all of them attained enlightenment, accompanied by penetrating insight.3. KN-a Dh.p.1.4.8so taṃ ādāya sāvatthiṃ ekarattivāsena gacchanto ekaṃ phāsukaṭṭhānaṃ patvā nivāsaṃ gaṇhiso 				pn	m.n.s		hetaṃ 				pn	m.ac.s	that, himādāya 			v	ger		takingsāvatthiṃ 			n	f.ac.s		Sāvatthiekarattivāsena 		n	m.ins.s	by staying for one nightgacchanto 			prp	m.nom.s	going, walkingekaṃ 			adj	m.ac.s	a, a certain, a singlephāsuka-ṭṭhānaṃ	n	m.ac.s	pleasant place patvā 			v	abs		having reached, having arrivednivāsaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	dwelling, living placegaṇhi				v	aor.3.s	took hold (of), claimedHaving taken him, he went to the Sāvatthi, staying only for one night (on the way), when he reached a certain pleasant place, he claimed a dwelling.4. KN-a Dh.p.1.5.1rājā kira pasenadi kosalo ekasmiṃ chaṇadivase ... hatthiṃ abhiruyha mahantena rājānubhāvena nagaraṃ padakkhiṇaṃ karoti.rājā 				n	m.n.s		kingkira 				ind			it is said, allegedly, apparently, one would think, 								I have heard, people saypasenadi 			n	m.n.s		Pasenadikosalo 			adj	m.n.s		of Kosala Kingdomekasmiṃ 			adj	m.loc.s	in one, certainchaṇadivase 		n	m.loc.s	in festival dayhatthiṃ 			n	m.ac.s	elephant, lit. having a hand i.e. trunkabhiruyha 			v	ger		ascending, climbing aboard, mounting (a horse, 								elephant or vehicle)mahantena 		adj	m.ins.s	with great, large, powerful, grand, mighty, vastrājānubhāvena 		n	m.ins.s	with royal dignity, royal majesty, royal splendournagaraṃ 			n	nt.ac.s	town, city, fortified townpadakkhiṇaṃ karoti 	v    	pr.3.s   	go around a person to the right out of respect, circle 						around to the rightIt is said, Pasenadi, King of the Kosala, on a certain festival day, having mounted an elephant, made a circle around the city with great royal splendour.5. KN-a Dh.p.1.5.1so “bhariyaṃ me nissāya bhayena uppannena bhavitabban””ti cintetvā ... gantvā rājānaṃ vanditvā aṭṭhāsi.	so 				pn	m.n.s		hebhariyaṃ 			n	f.ac.s		wife, lit. who is supportedme 				pn	1.gen.s	mynissāya 			ind			because (of), on account (of)bhayena 			n	nt.ins.s	by fear, fright, terror,// dismay, danger (of), peril (of)uppannena	 		pp	nt.ins.s	by arisen, appeared, come into existencebhavitabban””ti 		ptp	nt.n.s		it must be, it should existcintetvā ... 			v	abs		having thought, having reflectedgantvā 			v	abs		having gone (to), having travelled (to)rājānaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	kingvanditvā 			v	abs		having bowed, having paid respect, having honouredaṭṭhāsi.			v	aor.3.s	stood, stayed, remained“It must be because of my wife this danger has arisen”, he thought. Having gone, he paid respect to the king and stood. 6. KN-a Dh.p.1.5.1yathāladdhena byañjanena saddhiṃ allameva bhattaṃ pacchiyaṃ opīḷetvā ādāya yojanikaṃ maggaṃ pakkantoyathāladdhena 		adj	m.ins.s	with whatever one has got.byañjanena 		n	nt.ins.s	with currysaddhiṃ 			ind			together (with), withallam’eva 			adj	nt.ac.s	just wet, moist, dampbhattaṃ			n	nt.ac.s	rice pacchiyaṃ 			n	f.los.s	in wicker basket, hand-basketopīḷetvā 			v	abs		having squashed (into), having pressed down (in)ādāya 			v	ger		takingyojanikaṃ 			adj	m.ac.s  	approximately 11 kilometres in lengthmaggaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	road, path, trackpakkanto			pp	m.n.s		left, set out, departed, gone away, disappearedHe squashed wet rice with whatever curry he has got into the hand-basket, took it and departed to the journey, approximately 11 kilometres in length.7. KN 8.4		 sabbhi-r-eva samāsetha, paṇḍiteh’atthadassibhi.atthaṃ mahantaṃ gambhīraṃ, duddasaṃ nipuṇaṃ aṇuṃ, dhīrā samadhigacchanti, appamattā vicakkhaṇā’ti.sabbhi-			n	m.ins.pl	with the wise, with the virtuouseva 				ind			only, just, so, evensamāsetha, 		v	imp.2.pl	you should associate, keep close companypaṇḍitehi-			adj	m.ins.pl	with wise, intelligent, learned, knowledgeable, skilledatthadassibhi.		adj	m.ins.pl	with who see the goal, see the truthatthaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	benefit, profit, good, welfare, goal	mahantaṃ 			adj	m.ac.s	great, large, powerful, grand, mighty, vast, extensivegambhīraṃ, 		adj	m.ac.s	deep, profound duddasaṃ 			adj	m.ac.s	difficult to see, difficult to understandnipuṇaṃ 			adj	m.ac.s	fine, subtle aṇuṃ, 			adj	m.ac.s	subtle, finedhīrā 				n	m.n.pl	wise people, sagessamadhigacchanti, 	v	pr.3.pl	they attain, clearly understand, totally getappamattā 			adj	m.n.pl	diligent, vigilant, careful, lit. not intoxicatedvicakkhaṇā’ti.		adj	m.n.pl	attentive, vigilant, watchful, lit. seeing clearlyYou should associate only with the virtuous, with wise, with whose who see the goal. Wise people who are diligent and attentive - clearly understand the goal what is mighty, profound, difficult to see, fine and subtle.8. KN-a Dh.p.1.1.9sā udakabindūhi paggharanteheva aḍḍhullikhitehi kesehi vegena gantvā, “tuvaṭaṃ kho, ayyaputta, āgaccheyyāsī”ti āha.sā 				pn	f.n.s		sheudakabindūhi 		n	nt.ins.pl	with drops of waterpaggharanteheva 	prp	nt.ins.pl	with dripping, trickling, oozingaḍḍhullikhitehi 		adj	m.ins.pl	with half combed (hair)kesehi 			n	m.ins.pl	with hairvegena 			ind			quickly, with speed, with hastegantvā, 			v	abs		having gone (to), having travelled (to)“tuvaṭaṃ 			ind			quickly, immediatelykho, 				ind			indeed, surely, certainly, trulyayyaputta, 			n	m.voc.s	young gentleman, noble son, master’s sonāgaccheyyāsī”ti 		v	opt.2s	you should come, come backāha.				v	perf.3.s	she saidWith dripping drops of water and the hair half combed, she quickly went. “You should come back immediately, young gentleman.” she said.  9. KN-a Dh.p.1.4.8tasmiṃ pana nagare anusaṃvaccharaṃ vivaṭanakkhattaṃ nāma hoti. tadā bahi anikkhamanakulānipi parivārena saddhiṃ gehā nikkhamitvā appaṭicchannena sarīrena padasāva nadītīraṃ gacchanti.tasmiṃ 			pn	nt.loc.s	in thatpana 				ind			moreover, and now, butnagare 			n	nt.loc.s	in town, city, fortified townanusaṃvaccharaṃ 	ind			annually, yearly vivaṭanakkhattaṃ 	n	nt		uncovered festival, nude celebrationnāma 			ind			called, by the name of, namelyhoti. 				v	pr.3.s		it wastadā 				ind			then, at that timebahi 				ind			externally, outsidea-nikkhamana-		adj			not exiting, going outkulāni’pi			n	nt.n.pl	even familiesparivārena 			n	m.ins.s	with retinue, associates, entouragesaddhiṃ 			ind			together (with), withgehā 				n	m.abl.s	from house, dwellingnikkhamitvā 		v	abs		having gone out (from), having exited, having leftappaṭicchannena		adj	nt.ins.s	by uncovered, nakedsarīrena			n	nt.ins.s	by body padasā’va 			n	m.ins.s	just by footnadītīraṃ 			n	nt.ac.s	riverside, bank of a river, shoregacchanti.			v	pr.3.pl	they go, walk, move, wander aroundAnnually in that town was so-caled “Uncovered festival”. At that time even families, who do not (usually) going outside, go away from the house together with retinue, they wander by foot to the bank of a river with uncovered body.   10. KN-a Ud,5.3“suppabuddha ... ahaṃ te aparimitaṃ dhanaṃ dassāmi, ‘buddho na buddho, dhammo na dhammo, saṅgho na saṅgho, alaṃ me buddhena, alaṃ me dhammena, alaṃ me saṅghenā’ti vadehī”ti.“suppabuddha 		n	m.voc.s	Suppabuddhaahaṃ 			pn	1.n.s		Ite 				pn	2.dat.s	to youaparimitaṃ 		adj			immeasurable, limitlessdhanaṃ 			n	nt.ac.s	wealth, riches, treasuredassāmi, 			v	fut.1.s	I will give	‘buddho 			n	m.n.s		the Buddhana 				ind			notbuddho,  			n	m.n.s		the Buddhadhammo 			n	m.n.s		the Teachingna  				ind			notdhammo,			n	m.n.s		the Teaching saṅgho 			n	m.n.s		the Community			na  				ind			notsaṅgho, 			n	m.n.s		the Community	alaṃ 				ind			enoughme 				pn	1.gen.s	for mebuddhena,   		n	m.ins.s	with the Buddhaalaṃ 				ind			enoughme 				pn	1.gen.s	for medhammena, 		n	m.ins.s	with the Teachingalaṃ				ind			enoughme 				pn	1.gen.s	for mesaṅghenā’ti 		n	m.ins.s	with the Community	vadehī”ti.			v	imp.2.s	you should saySuppabuddha, I will give you immeasurable wealth. Please say: “The Buddha is not a Buddha, the Dhamma is not a Dhamma, the Sangha is not a Sangha. I have enough of the Buddha, I have enough of the Dhamma, I have enough of the Sangha.”11. MN 86			 atha kho āyasmā aṅgulimālo bhinnena sīsena, lohitena gaḷantena, bhinnena pattena, vipphālitāya saṅghāṭiyā yena bhagavā tenupasaṅkami.atha kho 			ind			then, and then, after thatāyasmā 			n	m.n.s		venerable, lit. old, respectedaṅgulimālo 			n	m.n.s		Aṅgulimālabhinnena 			adj	nt.ins.s	with damagedsīsena, 			n	nt.ins.s	with headlohitena 			n	nt.ins.s	with bloodgaḷantena, 			prp	nt.ins.s	with flowing, dripping, tricklingbhinnena 			adj	nt.ins.s	with damagedpattena, 			n	nt.ins.s	with bowl, alms bowlvipphālitāya 		pp	f.ins.s	torn apart, ripped apartsaṅghāṭiyā 			n	f.ins.s	with outer robe, patchwork robe, lit. joined togetheryena 				ind			where, whereverbhagavā 			n	m.n.s		Sublime One, Blessed One, Fortunate One, Buddhatenupasaṅkami.		v	aor.3.s	approached there, went to that placeThen venerable Aṅgulimāla with damaged head, with dripping blood, with damaged bowl, with ripped apart outer robe, approached the Blessed One.12. DN 14.1vipassī, bhikkhave, bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho khattiyo jātiyā ahosi, … koṇḍañño gottena ahosi.vipassī, 			n	m.n.s		insightful one, name of a Buddhabhagavā 			n	m.n.s		Sublime One, Blessed One, Fortunate One, Buddhaarahaṃ 			n	m.n.s		enlightened being, lit. worthy onesammāsambuddho 	n	m.n.s		perfectly awakened one, fully enlightened beingkhattiyo 			n	m.n.s		(man of the) warrior caste, high caste, ruling caste, 								noble manjātiyā 			f	f.ins.s	by birthahosi				v	aor.3.s	was, existed, becamekoṇḍañño 			n	m.n.s		well-known gotta, Koṇḍañña klangottena 			n	nt.ins.s	by family, ancestry, lineage, descentahosi.			v	aor.3.s	was, existed, becameThe Blessed One Vipassi, worthy one, perfectly awakened one, was a noble man by birth and Koṇḍañña by family.14. KN-a Dh.p.1.4.8		 “bhante, imaṃ catumāsaṃ bhikkhusaṅghaṃ gahetvā idheva vasatha, pāsādamahaṃ karissāmī”ti.“bhante, 			n	m.voc.s	sir, lord, reverendimaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	thiscatumāsaṃ 		n	nt.ac.s	period of four months; four months.bhikkhusaṅghaṃ 	n	m.ac.s	community of monksgahetvā 			v	abs		having brought, having fetchedidh’eva 			ind			right here, just here, only herevasatha, 			v	imp.2.pl	may you live, stay, residepāsādaṃ-			n	m.ac.s	mansion, stately home, palace, building with pillarsahaṃ 			pn	1.n.s		Ikarissāmī”ti.		v	fut.1.s	I will make, buildVenerable for this period of four months after fetched community of monks, may you stay here, I will build the mansion.15. KN 9.73	amatamhi vijjamāne, kiṃ tava pañcakaṭukena pītena.sabbā hi kāmaratiyo, kaṭukatarā pañcakaṭukena.amatamhi 			n	m.loc.s	when ambrosia, drink of immortality, sweet nectarvijjamāne, 			prp	m.loc.s	when existing, lit. is being foundkiṃ 				ind			not to mention, much less, what about?tava 				pn	2.gen.s	yourpañcakaṭukena		n	nt.ins.s	with (medicine made of) five bitter herbs pītena.			n	nt.ins.s	with drinksabbā 			adj	m.n.pl	all, every, whole, entire, completehi 				ind			indeed, certainly, truly, definitelykāmaratiyo,		n	f.n.pl		delights in sensual pleasurekaṭukatarā 			adj	m.n.pl	more bitter, more painfullpañcakaṭukena.		n	nt.ins.s	with (medicine made of) five bitter herbs When the ambrosia exists, what to speak about your drink made of five bitter herbs? All delights in sensual pleasure indeed more bitter than medicine made of five bitter herbs.16. Dhp 394		 kiṃ te jaṭāhi dummedha, kiṃ te ajinasāṭiyā, abbhantaraṃ te gahanaṃ, bāhiraṃ parimajjasī’ti.kiṃ 				ind			who? what? which?te 				pn	2.gen.s	yourjaṭāhi 			n	f.ins.pl	with dreadlocks, hairs twisted togetherdummedha, 		n	m.voc.s	fool, idiotkiṃ 				ind			who? what? which?te 				pn	2.gen.s	yourajinasāṭiyā, 		n	f.ins.s	with garment made of hide abbhantaraṃ 		n	nt.n.s		inside, interior, inner beingte  				pn	2.gen.s	yourgahanaṃ, 			n	nt.n.s		tangle, thicket, impenetrable jungle, dense forestbāhiraṃ 			n	nt.ac.s	outside, external appearanceparimajjasī’ti.		v	pr.2.s		you stroke, polishe, groomWhat (is the use) of your hairs twisted together? Idiot! What (is the use) of your garment made of hide? Your inside is the dense forest. You polishe (only) external appearance.17. DN 19.11sace te ūnaṃ kāmehi, ahaṃ paripūrayāmi te,yo taṃ hiṃsati vāremi, bhūmisenāpati ahaṃ.sace 				ind			ifte 				pn	2.dat.s	to youūnaṃ 			n	nt.n.s		shortage, deficiency, lack, want, needkāmehi, 			n	m.ins.pl	with pleasures, sensual pleasuresahaṃ 			pn	1.n.s		Iparipūrayāmi 		v	pr.1.s		I fulfil, satisfiete,				pn	2.dat.s	to you		yo 				pn	m.n.s		whoever, whatever, whichevertaṃ 				pn	2.ac.s	youhiṃsati 			v	pr.3.s		harms, hurts, injuresvāremi			v	pr.1.s		I prevent, obstruct, hinderbhūmisenāpati 		n	m.n.s		the ruler of the land and the armyahaṃ.			pn	1.n.s		IIf there is lack of sensual pleasures for you, I will fulfil it for you.Whoever harms you, I will obstruct. I am the ruler of the land and the army.
 Examples 19 1. JAa 80bodhisatto: idān’esa hatthipiṭṭhito patitvā marissatī’ti hatthikkhandhato apatanatthaṃ bhīmasenaṃ yottena parikkhipitvā gaṇhibodhisatto			n	m.n.s		Buddha-to-be, lit. awakening beingidāni-				ind			now, soon, at present						esa 				pn	m.n.s		this, he, ithatthi-			n			elephant, lit. having a hand i.e. trunkpiṭṭhito 			ind			behind, at the rear of, just behindpatitvā 			v	abs		having fallen down (from), having fallen off (of), 								having fallen (onto)	marissatī’ti 			v	fut.3.s	will diehatthikkhandhato		n	m.abl.s	from elephant’s back apatanatthaṃ 		ind			for the purpose of not fallingbhīmasenaṃ 		n	m.ac.s	Bhīmasenayottena 			n	m.ins.s	with rope, cord, strap, anything for tyingparikkhipitvā		v	abs		having encircled, having thrown around gaṇhi				v	aor.3.s	grabbed hold, grasped, held tightBuddha-to-be said: “Now he will die having fallen down from the elephant’s back.” Having encircled a rope on Bhīmasena for the purpose of not falling from the elephant’s back, he grabbed hold on him.2. JAa 70	 dīghato tiṃsayojanaṃ vitthārato pannarasayojanaṃ assamapadaṃ māpehī”tidīghato 			adj	nt.abl.s	in length, longtiṃsayojanaṃ 		adj	nt.ac.s	thirty (30) yojanasvitthārato 			adj	nt.abl.s	in width, in breadthpannarasayojanaṃ 	adj	nt.ac.s	fifteen (15) yojanasassamapadaṃ 		n	nt.ac.s	ashram, monastery, hermitagemāpehī”ti			v	imp.2.s	you should make, build, construct, have it buildYou should have a monastery to build, thirty yojanas in length and fifteen yojanas in width.3.a. KN 8.251“passāmi loke sadhane manusse, laddhāna vittaṃ na dadanti mohā. passāmi 			v	pr.1.s		I sees, finds, understandsloke 				n	m.loc.s	in the worldsadhane 			adj	m.ac.pl	rich, wealthy, lit. with wealthmanusse			n	m.ac.pl	peopleladdhāna 			v	abs		having got, having obtainedvittaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	wealth, property, powerna dadanti 			v	pr.3.pl	they not give, offer, donatemohā.			n	nt.abl.s	from illusion, delusion, confusionI see rich people in the world, who having obtained wealth do not give, because of delusion. 3.b. KN 8.251		 “tasmā hi paññāva dhanena seyyā, yāya vosānamidhādhigacchati.“tasmā 			ind			from that, therefore, that is why, lit. from that	hi 				ind			indeed, certainly, truly, definitelypaññā-			n	f.n.s		wisdom, knowledge, intelligence, intellect, 									understanding, insighteva 				ind			only, just, so, evendhanena 			n	m.ins.s	with wealth, riches, treasureseyyā			adj	f.n.s		better, better than, preferableyāya				pn	f.ins.s	by whichever, with which (woman) vosānaṃ-			n			 (relative) achievement, perfection, accomplishmentidha-				ind			here, now, in this worldadhigacchati. 		v	pr.3.s		gets, finds, obtains, attainsTherefore indeed wisdom better than wealth, by which one reach perfection.4. DHPa 1.5.11 jambukatthera vatthu	 āvuso, āgantuka kuṭumbikassa te gehe bhattaṃ bhuñjanato varataraṃ mīḷhaṃ khādituṃ... kuṭumbikena dinna-sāṭaka-nivāsanato varataraṃ naggena vicarituṃāvuso, 			n	m.voc.s	brother, friendāgantuka 			n	m.voc.s	Āgantuka, lit: guest, newcomer, new arrivalkuṭumbikassa 		n	m.gen.s	of head of a family, householder, family mante 				pn	2.dat.s	for you, to yougehe 				n	m.loc.s	in house, dwellingbhattaṃ 			n	nt.ac.s	food, mealbhuñjanato 		n	nt.abl.s	from eating, diningvarataraṃ 			ind			better, even bettermīḷhaṃ 			n	nt.ac.s	excrement, dung, urinekhādituṃ			v	inf		to eat, to chew, to devourkuṭumbikena 		n	m.ins.s	by head of a family, householder, personal namedinna-			pp			given, offeredsāṭaka-			n			cloak, outer garmentnivāsanato 			n	nt.abl.s	from dressing, clothingvarataraṃ 			ind			better, even betternaggena 			adj	m.ins.s	by naked, nudevicarituṃ			v	inf		to wander about, to go aroundFriend  Āgantuka, it is better for you to eat excrement than eating food of householder, it is better to go around naked than dressing in cloak offered by householder.5. DHPa 1.4.10atha kho āyasmā mahākassapo tassa sattāhassa accayena tamhā samādhimhā vuṭṭhāsi.	atha kho 				ind			then, and then, after thatāyasmā mahākassapo		n	m.n.s		Venerable Mahākassapatassa 				pn	nt.gen.s	of that				sattāhassa 				n	nt.gen.s	of week, seven daysaccayena 				ind			after the passing (of), after the lapse (of)tamhā 				pn	m.abl.s	from thatsamādhimhā 			n	m.abl.s	from perfect peace of mind, stability of mind, 									stillness of mindvuṭṭhāsi.				v	aor.3.s	arose (from), emerged (from)And then Venerable Mahākassapa emerged from absorption after one week.6. DN 20.1dasahi ca lokadhātūhi devatā yebhuyyena sannipatitā hontidasahi 			adj	f.abl.pl	from tenca 				ind			andlokadhātūhi 		n	f.abl.pl	from world systems, world spheresdevatā 			n	f.n.s		deities, godsyebhuyyena 		ind			mostly, almost all, altogethersannipatitā 			pp	f.n.pl		gathered together, assembled, lit. fallen togetherhonti				v	pr.3.pl	they areAnd almost all deities from ten world systems gathered together.7. DhpA“kiṃ pana tvaṃ mahābrahmato’pi uttaritaro””ti? “āma, jambuka, ahañhi brahmunāpi atibrahmā”ti.“kiṃ 				pn			who? what? which?pana 				ind			moreover, and now, buttvaṃ 				pn	2.n.s		youmahābrahmato’pi 	n	m.abl.s	even from Great God Almighty, Supreme Spirituttaritaro”ti? 		adj	m.n.s		more excellent (than), even better (than), even higher 							(than)“āma, 			ind			yes, certainlyjambuka, 			n	m.voc.s	jackalahañ’hi 			pn	1.n.s		I trulybrahmunā’pi 		n	m.abl.s	even from God, creator godatibrahmā”ti.		n	m.abl.s	from beyond god, even higher god, more superior godIt is true that you more excellent even than Great God Almighty? Yes, jackal, I am even (more than)  God (even more than) Higher God.8. DN 14.1tathāgato atīte buddhe … jātitopi anussarissati, nāmatopi … gottatopi … āyuppamāṇatopi …tathāgato 			n	m.n.s		Such Become, Realised, being in such a stateatīte 				adj	m.ac.pl	pastbuddhe 			n	m.ac.pl	Budhhasjātito’pi 			n	f.abl.s	in terms of birth, rebirth, conception			anussarissati, 		v	fut.3.s	will remembernāmato’pi			n	nt.abl.s	in terms of namegottato’pi			n	nt.abl.s	in terms of family, ancestry, lineage, descentāyuppamāṇato’pi 	n	nt.abl.s	in terms of length of life, life-span		Such Become remembers past Buddhas’ birthes, names, ancestry and life-span.9. KN 8.244 TH 244 khadiravaniyarevata theragāthā			 anaṅgaṇassa posassa, niccaṃ sucigavesino.vāl’aggamattaṃ pāpassa, abbhamattaṃ’va khāyati.anaṅgaṇassa 		adj	m.dat.s	for spotless, blemish freeposassa, 			n	m.dat.s	for manniccaṃ 			ind			continuously, always, permanentlysucigavesino.		adj	m.dat.s	of seeking purity, seeking the goodvāla-				n			tail hairagga-				n			tip, topmattaṃ 			adj	m.ac.s	as many as, as much as, a measure of, consisting ofpāpassa, 			n	nt.gen.s	of evilabbhamattaṃ- 		adj	m.ac.s	size of a cloud, i.e. enormous, dreadful, ominousva				ind			like, askhāyati.			v	pr.3.s		appears to be, seems to be, is seen asFor the blemish free man, who always seeking purity, even a hair-tip-measure of evil seems like the size of a thundercloud.10.	DN 16.22			 catunnaṃ, bhikkhave, dhammānaṃ ananubodhā appaṭivedhā evamidaṃ dīghamaddhānaṃ sandhāvitaṃ saṃsaritaṃ mamañceva tumhākañca.catunnaṃ			adj	m.gen.pl	of fourdhammānaṃ 		n	m.gen.pl	of thingsananubodhā 		n	m.abl.s	because of non-comprehension, misunderstandingappaṭivedhā 		n	m.abl.s	because of non-penetration, non-understanding, non-							comprehension, lit. not piercing throughevam’idaṃ 			adv+pn		thus thisdīghamaddhānaṃ 	ind			for a long timesandhāvitaṃ 		n	nt.n.s		transmigrating, lit. ran alongsaṃsaritaṃ 		n	nt.n.s		wandering on, moving on continuously, transmigratingmamañ’c’eva 		pn	1.dat.s	for metumhākañ’ca.		pn	2.dat.s	for your					Because of non-comprehension and non-penetration of four things, there was transmigration and wandering on for a long time for you and even for me.11. DN 14.4vipassī kumāro bahuno janassa piyo ahosi manāpovipassī 			n	m.n.s		insightful one, name of a Buddhakumāro 			n	m.n.s		princebahuno 			adj	m.dat.s	for many, much, lots (of), a lot (of), great, largejanassa			n	m.dat.s	for men, people, population piyo 				adj	m.n.s		liked, pleasant, agreeableahosi 			v	aor.3.s	was, existed, becamemanāpo			adj	m.n.s		pleasant, likeable, attractive, agreeable, lit. pervading 							the mindPrince Vipassī was loved and dear for many people.12. DN 14.4bandhumā rājā vipassissa kumārassa tayo pāsāde kārāpesibandhumā 			n	m.n.s		Bandhumārājā 				n	m.n.s		kingvipassissa  		n	m.dat.s	to insightful one, name of a Buddhakumārassa 		n	m.dat.s	to princetayo 				adj	m.ac.pl	three (3)pāsāde 			n	m.ac.pl	mansions, palaces, building with pillarskārāpesi			v	aor.3.s	caused to do, caused to make, caused to buildKing Bandhumā had three palaces build for prince Vipassī.13. DN 14.10vipassissa bodhisattassa rahogatassa paṭisallīnassa evaṃ cetaso parivitakko udapādivipassissa 			n	m.gen.s	when insightful one, name of a Buddhabodhisattassa 		n	m.gen.s	when Buddha-to-be, lit. awakening beingrahogatassa 		adj	m.gen.s	when in private, gone into seclusionpaṭisallīnassa 		pp	m.gen.s	when withdrawn into seclusionevaṃ 			ind			thus, this, like this, just as, suchcetaso 			n	m.dat.s	to mindparivitakko			n	m.n.s		reflection, contemplation, train of thoughtudapādi			v	aor.3.s	arose, sprung upWhen the Buddha-to-be Vipassī was withdrawn into seclusion, gone into seclusion, this reflection arose in (his) mind14. SN 8.1		 alābhā vata me, na vata me lābhā; dulladdhaṃ vata me, na vata me suladdhaṃ; yassa me anabhirati uppannāalābhā 			ind			it is a loss (for)! it is bad luck (for)!vata 				ind			oh! oh no! oh dear!me,				pn	1.dat.s	to me na 				ind			notvata 				ind			oh! oh no! oh dear!me 				pn	1.dat.s	to me lābhā; 			ind			it is a gain, it’s a win, it’s a blessingdulladdhaṃ 		n	nt.n.s		misfortune, unluck, lit. bad gainvata  				ind			oh! oh no! oh dear!me, 				pn	1.dat.s	to me na 				ind			notvata 				ind			oh! oh no! oh dear!me 				pn	1.dat.s	to me suladdhaṃ			n	nt.n.s		fortune, luck, lit. well gain yassa 			pn	m.dat.s	to whom, for who, for whoever, for whatever, for 								whichever	me 				pn	1.dat.s	to me anabhirati 			n	f.n.s		dissatisfaction, discontentuppannā			pp	f.n.s		arisen, appeared, come into existenceoh dear! It is a loss for me! oh dear! it is not a gain for me! oh dear! It is a misfortune for me! oh dear! It is not a fortun for me, whom dissatisfaction has arisen.rāgo cittaṃ anuddhaṃseti, taṃ kutettha labbhā, yaṃ me paro anabhiratiṃ vinodetvā abhiratiṃ uppādeyya. Lust infesting (my) mind. How in this regard could it be, that anyone else could dispel (my) dissatisfaction and could give rise to delight? yaṃnūn’āhaṃ attanā’va attano anabhiratiṃ vinodetvā abhiratiṃ uppādeyyan”ti.What if I just by myself for myself could dispel dissatisfaction and could give rise to delight?15. DN 5siyā kho pana bhoto rañño mahāyaññaṃ yajamānassa kocideva vippaṭisārosiyā 			v	opt.3.s	one could be, it may be, one might be, it should bekho pana 		ind			and thanbhoto rañño 	n	m.gen.s	when sir king, for you kingmahāyaññaṃ 	n	m.ac.s	great sacrifice, great offeringyajamānassa 	n	m.gen.s	when making sacrifice, sacrificingkocideva 		ind			even some, just somevippaṭisāro		n	m.n.s		remorse, regretIt could be some regret when king makes the sacrifice.16. KN-a Dh.p.1.1.12ajjatagge dānāhaṃ, āvuso ānanda, aññatreva bhagavatā, aññatra, bhikkhusaṅghā uposathaṃ karissāmiajjatagge		ind			from today onwards, lit. today first dāni’			ind			now, immediately									ahaṃ, 		pn	1.n.s		Iāvuso ānanda, 	n	m.voc.s	friend Anandaaññatra-		ind			elsewhere (from), away (from), in another place (from)eva 			ind			justbhagavatā, 	n	m.abl.s	form the Buddhaaññatra,		ind			elsewhere (from), away (from), in another place (from) bhikkhusaṅghā 	n	m.abl.s	from community of monksuposathaṃ 	n	m.ac.s	full moon or new moon observance daykarissāmi		v	fut.1.s	I will doFriend Ananda, now from today onwards, I will make observance day elsewhere from the Buddha and from community of monks.17. Vin 1, 4.3.3“evaṃ, devā”ti kho so mahāmatto rañño māgadhassa seniyassa bimbisārassa paṭissuṇitvā āyasmato pilindavacchassa pañca ārāmikasatāni pādāsi“evaṃ, 		ind			yes!devā”ti 		n	m.voc.s	o king!kho			ind			indeed so 			pn	m.n.s		he, thatmahāmatto 	n	m.n.s		chief minister, chancellor, cabinet memberrañño 		n	m,gen.s	of king, king’smāgadhassa 	n	m.gen.s	of Kingdom of Magadhaseniyassa 		n	m.gen.s	of Seniya, related to the army, soldier, army generalbimbisārassa	n	m.gen.s	of Bimbisāra paṭissuṇitvā 	v	abs		having assented; having promised; having agreedāyasmato 		n	m.dat.s	to Venerablepilindavacchassa		n	m.dat.s	to Pilindavaccha pañca 		n	-.ac.pl	5ārāmika-		n	m		monastery attendant, monastery worker, lit. gardenersatāni 		adj	nt.ac.pl	100pādāsi		v	aor.3.s	gave, granted, presented, bestowed“Yes, king!” that minister of king of Magadha general Bimbisāra promised to Venerable  Pilindavaccha. He gave 500 monastery workers. 18. DN 9.1svāgataṃ, bhante, bhagavato. cirassaṃ kho, bhante, bhagavā imaṃ pariyāyamakāsi, yadidaṃ idhāgamanāya.svāgataṃ, 		ind			welcome! you are welcome!bhante,   		n 	m.voc.s	sir, lord, reverendbhagavato. 	n	m.dat.s	to the Sublime One, Blessed One, Fortunate One, Buddhacirassaṃ 		ind			at last, a long time since, after a long timekho, 			ind			indeedbhante,   		n 	m.voc.s	sir, lord, reverendbhagavā 		n	m.n.s		Sublime One, Blessed One, Fortunate One, Buddhaimaṃ 		pn	m.ac.s	thispariyāyam-		n	m.ac.s	turn, detour, roundabout wayakāsi			v	aor.3.s	did, madeyadidaṃ 		ind			namely, that is, lit. which thisidha-			ind			here, nowāgamanāya.	n	nt.dat.s	to coming, approach, arrivalO venerable, welcome to the Blessed One! Sir, indeed after a long time the Blessed One made this detour, namely coming here. 
 Examples 201. KN-a Ja 78gahapatiko rathā otaritvā kesesu gahetvā nāmetvā kapparapahārehi koṭṭetvā gale gahetvā āgatamaggābhimukhaṃ khipitvā pakkāmigahapatiko 		n	m.n.s		householder, landowner			rathā 				n	m.abl.s	from chariot, coach, carriage, wagon, cartotaritvā 			v	abs		having descended, having gone down, having enteredkesesu 			n	m.loc.pl	in (head) hairgahetvā 			v	abs		having grabbed hold (of), having seized, having takennāmetvā 			v	abs		having caused to bend, having bent someone overkapparapahārehi 	n	m.ins.pl	by elbow blowskoṭṭetvā 			v	abs		having pounded, having smashed, having pummeledgale 				n	m.loc.s	in neck, throatgahetvā 			v	abs		having grabbed hold (of), having seized, having takenāgatamagga-		n			road on which one came, way one cameabhimukhaṃ 		ind	adv		towards, facing, in the direction ofkhipitvā 			v	abs		having thrown, having tossedpakkāmi			v	aor.3.s	went away (from), left, set off (from)The householder descended from the chariot, grabbed (him) by the hair, caused (him) to bend, smashed him with elbow blows, grabbed him by neck, threw him in the direction of the road on which he came, and went away.2. KN-a Ja 78gahapatiko pakkhanditvā asaniṃ pātento viya khandhe paharitvā rathaṃ ādāya agamāsigahapatiko 		n	m.n.s		householder, landowner	pakkhanditvā 		v	abs		having jumped forward, having sprung forward, 								having leaped (into)asaniṃ 			n	f.ac.s		thunderbolt, lightning flash, Indra’s thunderboltpātento 			prp	m.n.s		of dropping down, fallingviya 				ind			like, askhandhe			n	m.loc.s	in shoulderpaharitvā 			v	abs		having beaten; having hit; having struck.rathaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	chariot, coach, carriage, wagon, cartādāya 			v	ger		taking, holdingagamāsi			v	aor.3.s	went (to), left (for)The householder jumped forward, like dropping thunderbolt, beat (him) to the shoulder, holding the chariot he left away.3. SN 7.15				kesu na mānaṃ kayirātha, kesu c’assa sagāravo. ky’assa apacitā assu, ky’assu sādhu supūjitā”ti.Towards whom one should not be conceited? Towards whom one should be respectful? Who should be esteemed by one? Who should be very well venerated?mātari pitari c’āpi, atho jeṭṭhamhi bhātari. ācariye catutthamhi, tesu na mānaṃ kayirātha.Towards mother and father, then to the eldest brother. Towards teacher as the fourth. Towards them one should not make conceittesu na mānaṃ kayirātha, tesu assa sagāravo, ty’assa apacitā assu, ty’assu sādhu supūjitā.tesu 				pn	m.loc.pl	towards those, to themna 				ind			notmānaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	pride, conceit, egotism, lit. high opinion or measuringkayirātha, 			v     opt.reflx.3.s	one should make oneselftesu 				pn	m.loc.pl	in those, in them, among them, among thoseassa 				v	opt.3.s	one should besagāravo			adj	m.n.s		respectful, reverentialty’assa = te+assa	pn.n.pl+pn.dat.s		they for himapacitā 			pp	m.n.pl	respected, honoured, esteemedassu, 			v	opt.3.pl	they should be, they may be, they would be, 									may they bety’assu = te+assu	pn.n.pl+opt.3.pl	they may be, they should besādhu 			ind			well, thoroughlysupūjitā.			pp	m.n.pl	highly honoured, deeply veneratedTowards them one should not be conceited, towards them one should be respectful. They should be esteemed by one, they should be very well venerated. arahante sītībhūte, katakicce anāsave nihacca mānaṃ athaddho, te namasse anuttare”ti.Towards liberated arahants, who have done what needs to be done, free from the effluents. Destroing conceit and not proud one should pay homage to them, towards unsurpassed ones.    4.	DHP 116		 abhittharetha kalyāṇe, pāpā cittaṃ nivāraye, dandhañ’hi karoto puññaṃ, pāpasmiṃ ramatī mano.abhittharetha 		v	opt.refl.3.s	one should	make haste, could be quick to dokalyāṇe, 			n	m.loc.s	in goodness, good deeds, virtue, merit, benefitpāpā 				adj	m.abl.s	from evil, criminal, wrong, bad, viciouscittaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	mindnivāraye. 			v	opt.3.s	should prevent (from), could obstruct (from), 									restrain (from), block (from)dandhañ’hi 		ind			indeed slowly; sluggishly.karoto 			prp	m.gen.s	when doing, makingpuññaṃ, 			n	nt.ac.s	merit, good deed, lit. (mental) puritypāpasmiṃ 			adj	m.loc.s	in evil, criminal, wrong, bad, viciousramatī 			v	pr.3.s		enjoys, finds pleasure (in), takes delight (in), likesmano.			n	m.n.s		mindOne should be quick in doing wholesome, should restrain mind from evil. Indeed when making merit slowly, the mind finds pleasure in evil.5. KN-a Dh.p.1.2.1atha seṭṭhi taṃ sīse cumbitvā parivāratthāya tassā pañca itthisatāni datvā taṃ attano jeṭṭhadhītuṭṭhāne ṭhapesiatha 				ind			then, also, and so, after thatseṭṭhi 			n	m.n.s		banker, treasurer, wealthy man, lit. foremosttaṃ 				pn	f.ac.s		hersīse 				n	m.loc.s	in headcumbitvā 			v	abs		having kissedparivāra-			n			retinue, associates, entourageatthāya 			n	m.dat.s	for the purpose (of), for the sake (of), for the good (of)tassā 			pn	f.dat.s	to her, for her, to that, for thatpañca 			adj	-.ac.pl	five (5)itthi-satāni 			n	nt.ac.pl	hundred womendatvā 			v	abs		having given, having offered, having donatedtaṃ 				pn	f.ac.s		herattano 			n	m.gen.s	of self, of oneself, one’s own, my ownjeṭṭha-			adj			first, eldest, foremostdhītu-				n			daughterṭhāne 			n	nt.loc.s	in position, station, roleṭhapesi			v	aor.3.s	appointed, established, set upThen the banker kissed her on the head, gave to her five hundred women as a retinue, and established her in position of his eldest daughter.6.KN-a Dh.p.1.1.7ekassa paccekabuddhassa jātassaraṃ oruyha nhāyantassa tīre ṭhapitesu kāsāvesu cīvaraṃ thenetvā tesaṃ hatthīnaṃ gaman’āgamanamagge sattiṃ gahetvā sasīsaṃ pārupitvā nisīdatiekassa 			adj	m.gen.s	of / when a certain, a singlepaccekabuddhassa 	n	m.gen.s	of / when Solitary Buddhajātassaraṃ 		n	m.ac.s	natural lake, naturally occurring pooloruyha 			v	ger		descending, going downnhāyantassa 		prp	m.gen.s	of / when bathing, taking a bathtīre 				n	nt.loc.s	in shore, riverbank, beachṭhapitesu 			pp	n.loc.pl	among placed, put down, lit. caused to standkāsāvesu 			n	n.loc.pl	among brown red robes, yellow brown robescīvaraṃ 			n	nt.ac.s	robe of a Buddhist monkthenetvā 			v	abs		having stolentesaṃ 			pn	m.gen.pl	of those, theirhatthīnaṃ 			pn	m.gen.pl	of elephantsgaman’āgamana-	n			coming and going, travelling up and downmagge			n	m.loc.s	in path, in road sattiṃ 			n	f.ac.s		spear, javelin, sword, weapongahetvā 			v	abs		having grabbed hold (of), having seized, having takensasīsaṃ 			ind	adv		from head to toe, up to the head, lit. with headpārupitvā 			v	abs		having covered, having wrappednisīdati			v	pr.3.s		sits, sits downHe went to the natural lake, when a certain Solitary Buddha was bathing, stole a robe of a Buddhist monk among brown red robes which were placed on the riverbank, took a spear, covered himself  from head to toe, and sat on the road on which their elephants were coming and going.7. DHPa“ahaṃ mātāpitūnaṃ apassantānaṃ yeva bahi gantvā pabbajissāmī”ti.“ahaṃ 			pn	1.n.s		Imātāpitūnaṃ 		n	m.gen.s	while mother and father, for parentsapassantānaṃ		prp	m.gen.s	while not seeing, not noticing, not awareyeva 				ind			just, only, even, even so, yet, alsobahi 				ind			externally, outsidegantvā 			v	abs		having gone (to), having travelled (to)pabbajissāmī”ti.		v	fut.1.s	I will ordain, renounceWhen my mother and father are not looking, I will go outside and renounce!8. KN 10.8uppātesu nimittesu, lakkhaṇesu ca kovidaṃ. ajjhāyakaṃ mantadharaṃ, porohicce ṭhapeti so.uppātesu 			n	m.loc.pl	in sudden events, comets, meteors, disastersnimittesu, 			n	nt.loc.pl	in signs, omens, portentslakkhaṇesu 		n	nt.loc.pl	in auspicious signs, birthmarks, prognosticative marks						or	quality, characteristicca 				ind			andkovidaṃ. 			adj	m.ac.s	skilled (in), expert (in), proficient (in), master (of)ajjhāyakaṃ 		n	m.ac.s	master, teacher, reciter of the Vedasmantadharaṃ, 		adj	m.ac.s	counsellor, advisor, bearer of the Vedasporohicce 			n	nt.loc.s	in office of purohita, chief priest-ship, prime minister-							ship, lit. placed-in-front-shipṭhapeti 			v	pr.3.s		appoints, establishes, sets up, places in a positionso.				pn	m.n.s		heHe appoints an advisor in office of purohita, who is reciter of the Vedas, who is skilled in sudden events, omens and auspicious signs.9. DN 4.3samaṇo khalu, bho, gotamo akāmakānaṃ mātāpitūnaṃ assumukhānaṃ rudantānaṃ ... agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajitosamaṇo 			n	m.n.s			ascetic, renunciant, holy man, monk, reclusekhalu, 			ind				indeed, surelybho				n	m.voc.s		sir, master, friend, good man, you (respectful 									address)gotamo 			n	m.n.s			of the Gotama familyakāmakānaṃ 		adj	m.gen.pl 		while unwilling, reluctantmātāpitūnaṃ 		n	m.gen.pl		while mother and father, parentsassumukhānaṃ		adj	m.gen.pl		while with tear-stained face, with a face lined 									with tears, lit. tear face rudantānaṃ 		prp	m.gen.pl		while crying, grieving, weeping, wailingagārasmā			n	nt.abl.s		from household life, domestic life anagāriyaṃ 		n	nt.ac.s		homelessnesspabbajito			pp	m.n.s			ordained, renouncedIndeed recluse master Gotama renounced from household life to homelessness, while his unwilling parents were crying with tear-stained face.10. DN 16.7atha kho bhagavā acirapakkantesu pāṭaligāmikesu upāsakesu suññāgāraṃ pāvisi.atha kho 			ind				and thenbhagavā 			n	m.n.s			the Sublime One, Blessed One, Fortunate One, 								the Buddhaacirapakkantesu 		adj	m.loc.pl		when recently departed, recently leftpāṭaligāmikesu 		adj	m.loc.pl		when of Pātaligāmaupāsakesu 			n	m.loc.pl		when lay disciples, lay devoteessuññāgāraṃ 		n	nt.ac.s		empty dwelling, uninhabited placepāvisi.			v	aor.3.s		entered, went (into)And then the Blessed One entered empty dwelling not long after the lay disciples of Pātaligāma departed.11. MN 39gate ṭhite nisinne sutte jāgarite bhāsite tuṇhībhāve sampajānakārī hotigate 				n	nt.loc.s	in moving; walkingṭhite 				n	nt.loc.s	in standingnisinne 			n	nt.loc.s	in seatingsutte 				n	nt.loc.s	in lying down, sleepingjāgarite 			n	nt.loc.s	in being awakebhāsite 			n	nt.loc.s	in speakingtuṇhībhāve 		n	nt.loc.s	in keeping quiet, being silentsampajānakārī		adj	m.n.s		attentive, alert, mindful, cultivating clear 										comprehensionhoti				v	pr.3.s		he isWhether walking, standing, sitting, lying down, waking up, talking and remaining silent he is cultivating clear comprehension.12. KN 15.539ajinamhi haññate dīpi, nāgo dantehi haññate. dhanamhi dhanino hanti, aniketam-asanthavaṃ.ajinamhi 			n	nt.loc.s	in (on account of) animal hide, furhaññate 			v.pass.opt.3.s	whould be hurt, could be killed, destroyeddīpi, 				n	m.n.s		leopard, panther, tigernāgo				n	m.n.s		elephant dantehi 			n	m.ind.pl	with (because of) tuskhaññate.  			v.pass.opt.3.s	whould be hurt, could be killed, destroyeddhanamhi 			n	m.loc.s	in (on account of) wealth, riches, treasuredhanino 			n	m.n.pl	wealthy people, rich menhanti, 			v	pr.3.pl	they kill, strikeaniketam-			adj	m.ac.s	homeless						asanthavaṃ.		adj	m.ac.s	companion-less, solitary, recluse		Tiger could be killed on account of hide, elephant could be killed on account of tusk, they (criminals) kill rich men on account of wealth. Homeless and solitary….13.	DN 16.26 tena kho pana samayena deve vassante deve gaḷagaḷāyante vijjullatāsu niccharantīsu asaniyā phalantiyā avidūre bhusāgārassa dve kassakā bhātaro hatā cattāro ca balibaddā’ti tena kho pana samayena 		idiom		now at that time, now on that occasiondeve vassante 				idiom		when it is rainingdeve 					n	m.loc.s	when rain-cloud gaḷagaḷāyante 			prp	m.loc.s	in pouring, thundering, making a gala-gala 									soundvijjullatāsu 				n	f.loc.pl	when forks of lightning, flashes of lightning, lit. 								lightning creeperniccharantīsu 			prp	f.loc.pl	when sending out, flashing down (of lightning)asaniyā 				n	f.loc.s	when thunderbolt, lightning flash, Indra’s 									thunderboltphalantiyā 				prp	f.loc.s	when splitting open, busting open, breaking 									openavidūre 				ind			near, not farbhusāgārassa 			n	m.gen.s	of Bhusāgāradve 					adj	m.n.pl	two (2)kassakā 				n	m.n.pl	farmer, ploughmanbhātaro 				n	m.n.pl	brothershatā 					pp	m.n.pl	killedcattāro 				adj	m.n.pl	fourca 					ind			andbalibaddā’ti				n	m.n.pl	ox, bullNow at that time when it was raining, thundering, flashing down of lightning and splitting open the thunderbolt, near Bhusāgāra, two brothers farmers and four bulls were killed.      14.	DN 26.2addasā kho, bhikkhave, so puriso bahunnaṃ vassānaṃ bahunnaṃ vassasatānaṃ bahunnaṃ vassasahassānaṃ accayena dibbaṃ cakkaratanaṃ osakkitaṃ ṭhānā cutaṃaddasā 			v	imperf.3.s	one sawkho, 				ind			indeed so				pn	m.n.s		he, that puriso 			n	m.n.s		man, personbahunnaṃ 			adj	m.gen.pl 	many, much, lots (of), a lot (of), great, largevassānaṃ 			n	m.gen.pl 	of yearsbahunnaṃ 			adj	m.gen.pl	of many, much, lots (of), a lot (of), great, largevassasatānaṃ 		adj	m.gen.pl	of one hundreds years, centuries	bahunnaṃ 			adj	m.gen.pl	of many, much, lots (of), a lot (of), great, largevassa-			n			yearsahassānaṃ 		adj	m.gen.pl	one thousands (1000)accayena 			ind			after the passing (of), after the lapse (of), dibbaṃ 			adj	nt.ac.s	divine, heavenly, celestialcakkaratanaṃ 		n	nt.ac.s	jewelled wheelosakkitaṃ 			pp	nt.ac.s	slipped down, moved backṭhānā 			n	m.abl.s	from placecutaṃ			pp	nt.ac.s	shifted, fallen, fallen downIndeed after the passing of many years, of many hundreds years, of many thousands years, that person saw divine jewelled wheel had shifted and fallen down from its place.15.	DN 3.9khattiyo seṭṭho jane-tasmiṃ, ye gottapaṭisārino. vijjācaraṇasampanno, so seṭṭho deva-mānuse’ti.khattiyo 			n	m.n.s		of warrior caste, of high caste, of ruling casteseṭṭho 			adj	m.n.s		foremost, best, primary, most importantjane-				n			peopletasmiṃ, 			pn	m.loc.s	among that, in himye				pn	m.n.pl	whoever, whatever, whichever, those who	 gottapaṭisārino		adj	m.n.pl	referring to, relying on lineage.vijjācaraṇasampanno, 	adj	m.n.s		perfect in theory and practice, accomplished in 						understanding and action, having wisdom and ethical conductso 				pn	m.n.s		he, that seṭṭho 			adj	m.n.s		foremost, best, primary, most importantdevamānuse’ti.		n	m.loc.s	in, among gods and menAmong those people who relying on lineage, the warrior caste is the foremost. Who  accomplished in wisdom and conduct he is the foremost among gods and men.16.	ja 545kusalā naccagītassa, sakkassa paricārikā.kusalā 			adj	f.n.pl		skilled, clever, expertnaccagītassa, 		n	nt.gen.s	of dancing and singing, acting and singingsakkassa 			n	m.gen.s	of Sakka, king of the Devasparicārikā.			f	f.n.pl		personal attendant, handmaidenHandmaiden of the Sakka is expert in dancing and singing.
 Examples 211.	DN 16.5tatr’assa dovāriko paṇḍito viyatto medhāvī aññātānaṃ nivāretā ñātānaṃ pavesetā.tatr’assa 			v	opt.3.s	there would be, there could bedovāriko 			n	m.n.s		gatekeeper; a janitor, a doorkeeper.paṇḍito 			adj	m.n.s		wise, intelligent, learned, knowledgeable, skilledviyatto 			adj	m.n.s		experienced, learned, initiated, lit. distinguishedmedhāvī 			adj	m.n.s		intelligent man, wise man, lit. who has wisdomaññātānaṃ 		adj	m.gen.pl	of not known, unknown, not recognisednivāretā 			n	m.n.s		who prevents, blocks, obstructs, bouncesñātānaṃ 			adj	m.gen.pl	of known; found out; known as; well-knownpavesetā.			n	m.n.s		who allows to enter, who ushers inThere would be a gatekeeper wise, experienced and intelligent who prevents those who unknown, and who allows to enter those who well-known. 2.	DN 16.39tena kho pana samayena āyasmā mahākassapo pāvāya kusināraṃ addhānamagga-ppaṭippanno hoti mahatā bhikkhusaṅghena.tena kho pana samayena 			now at that time, now on that occasionāyasmā 			n	m.n.s		venerable, lit. old, respectedmahākassapo 		n	m.n.s		Mahākassapapāvāya 			n			Pāvākusināraṃ			n	f.ac.s		Kusinara, a city of the Mallasaddhānamagga-		n			long road journey, main roadpaṭippanno 		pp	m.n.s		following a path, going along, travellinghoti				v	pr.3.s		there is mahatā 			adj	m.ins.s	with great, big		bhikkhusaṅghena.	n	m.ins.s	with community of monksNow at that time venerable Mahākassapa was travelling with big community of monks on the main road to Pāvā, Kusinara.3. DHP 178			 pathabyā ekarajjena, saggassa gamanena vā, sabbalok’ādhipaccena, sot’āpatti-phalaṃ varaṃ.pathabyā=pathaviyā	n	f.gen.s	of earth, of whole wide worldekarajjena, 		n	nt.ins.s	with sole rulership, sole dominion, sovereign powersaggassa 			n	f.gen.s	of heaven, state of happinessgamanena 			n	nt.ins.s	with going, walking, journeying, travellingvā, 				ind			or, either orsabbaloka-			n			whole world, every world’ādhipaccena, 		n	nt.ins.s	ruler-ship, lord-ship, presidencysot’āpattiphalaṃ 		n	nt.n.s		fruit of entering the streamvaraṃ.			ind			better (than), preferable (to)The fruit of entering the stream is better than sole rulership of whole wide world or going to heaven or ruler-ship over the entire universe.  4.	DN 19.8ko nu kho, bho, pahoti imaṃ mahāpathaviṃ uttarena āyataṃ dakkhiṇena sakaṭamukhaṃ sattadhā samaṃ suvibhattaṃ vibhajitun”ti?ko 				pn	m.n.s		who? what? which?nu kho, 			ind			does? is? would?bho, 				n	m.voc.s	sir, master, friend, good man, you (respectful address)pahoti 			v	pr.3.s		is able (to), is capable (of), is qualified (to)imaṃ 			pn	f.ac.s		thismahāpathaviṃ 		n	f.ac.s		great earth	uttarena 			ind	adv		in a northern direction; to the north (of, acc., gen., abl.)āyataṃ 			adj	f.ac.s		wide, broad, extendeddakkhiṇena			ind	adv		in a southern direction; to the south (of, acc., gen., 								abl.)sakaṭamukhaṃ 		adj	f.ac.s		tapering to the front lit. front of a cartsattadhā 			ind			in 7 piecessamaṃ 			ind			evenly, equally, similarly, likewisesuvibhattaṃ 		pp	f.ac.s		well divided, evenly dividedvibhajitun”ti?		v	inf		to divideO sir, who is able to divide evenly this great earth, broad in a northern direction and tapering to the front in a southern direction, evenly in 7 pieces?5.	KN-a Dh.p.1.4.12	dvinnaṃ gehānaṃ antare ubhato dīghaṃ āvāṭaṃ khaṇāpetvā gūthakalalassa pūrāpesi.dvinnaṃ 			adj, 	x gen pl	of twogehānaṃ 			n	m.gen.pl	of houses, dwellingsantare 			ind			in between, inside (of), amongubhato 			ind			both, on both sides, in both ways, duallydīghaṃ 			adj	m.ac.s	long (in space or time), tallāvāṭaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	pit, hole, trench, trap for animal catchingkhaṇāpetvā 		v	abs		having caused to dig, had dug	gūtha-			n			excrement, dung, ordurekalalassa			n	nt.gen.s	of mud, mire, dirt, filthpūrāpesi.			v	aor.3.s	caused to fill, made filled He had a hole dug between two houses long on both sides and made it filled with filth and excrement.6.	Vin-a 1rañño imaṃ pāṭihāriyaṃ passantassa pītiyā nirantaraṃ phuṭa-sarīrassa añjaliṃ paggahetvā ṭhitass’eva mahābodhi mūlasatena suvaṇṇakaṭāhe patiṭṭhāsi.rañño 			n	m.gen.s	when kingimaṃ 			pn	nt.ac.s	thispāṭihāriyaṃ 		n	nt.ac.s	miracle, wonder, lit. against the normpassantassa 		prp	m.gen.s	when seeingpītiyā 			n	f		delight, joy, rapture, blissnirantaraṃ 			ind			endlessly, immediately, continuouslyphuṭa-			pp			permeated (with), pervaded (with), suffused (with), 								filled (with)sarīrassa 			n	nt.gen.s	of bodyañjaliṃ 			n	f.ac.s		raised palms together as a token of respectpaggahetvā 		v	abs		having held up, having stretched out (hands in 								supplication), lit. having held forwardṭhitass’eva 			pp	m.gen.s	just when stood, stood still, standingmahābodhi 		n	f.n.s		great Bodhi treemūlasatena 		adj	m.ins.s	with 100 roots (of Bodhi tree)suvaṇṇakaṭāhe		n	m.loc.s	in golden vase, golden flower potpatiṭṭhāsi.			v	aor.3.s	planted itself, established itselfWhile the king was standing there and seeing this miracle, immediately his body was suffused with bliss. He stretched out raised palms together as a token of respect. And great Bodhi tree was established by itself with 100 roots in golden vase.7.	DN 16.29cattār’imāni, ānanda, saddhassa kulaputtassa dassanīyāni saṃvejanīyāni ṭhānāni.cattār’			adj	nt.n.pl	four (4)imāni, 			pn	nt.n.pl	theseānanda, 			n	m.voc.s	o Ānanda!saddhassa 			adj	m.dat.s	for faithful, confident, believingkulaputtassa 		n	m.dat.s	for son of a good family, respectable young man, 								young gentlemandassanīyāni 		adj	nt.n.pl	good to see (for), beautiful to behold (by)saṃvejanīyāni 		adj	nt.n.pl	with awe, with reverence, lit. should cause to be awedṭhānāni.			n	nt.n.pl	placeso Ānanda! These four places is good to see with reverence for faithful son of a good family.	8.	UD 69	atha kho te thūṇeyyakā brāhmaṇagahapatikā udapānaṃ tiṇassa ca bhusassa ca yāva mukhato pūresuṃ, mā te muṇḍakā samaṇakā pānīyaṃ apaṃsū’tiatha kho 			idiom			then, and then, after thatte 				pn	m.n.pl	they, thosethūṇeyyakā 		adj	m.n.pl	people of Thūṇa.brāhmaṇa-gahapatikā 	n	m.n.pl	priests and householders		 udapānaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	well, lit. water drinkingtiṇassa 			n	nt.gen.s	of grass, strawca 				ind			andbhusassa			n	nt.gen.s	chaff, husk, straw, debris ca 				ind			and yāva 				ind			as long as, as far as, up to, until, from ... tomukhato 			n	m.abl.s	from front part, front, toppūresuṃ			v	aor.3.pl	they filled up, made fullmā 				ind			do not, may one not, don’t lette 				pn	m.n.pl	they, thosemuṇḍakā 			n	m.n.pl	shaveling, skinhead, baldysamaṇakā 			n	m.n.pl	low ascetics, worthless ascetics, lit. little asceticspānīyaṃ 			n	nt.ac.s	water, drinking water, lit. drinkableapaṃsū’ti			v	aor.3.pl	they drankAnd then those priests and householders of Thūṇa filled up the well up to the top with grass and chaff. They did’t let drink water for baldy low ascetics.9.	DN 19	rājā disampati bhoto jotipālassa māṇavassa dassanakāmo’”ti.rājā 				n	m.n.s		kingdisampati 			n	m.n.s		lord of the directions, Disampatibhoto				n	m.gen.s	of sir, for master, for you jotipālassa 			n	m.gen.s	of Jotipālamāṇavassa 		n	m.gen.s	of young man, young gentleman, young Brahmandassanakāmo’”ti.		adj	m.n.s		wishes to see, wants to seeThe king Disampati wants to see young Brahman master Jotipāla.10.	AN 1.600-611amataṃ tesaṃ, bhikkhave, paribhuttaṃ yesaṃ kāyagatāsati paribhuttā”ti.amataṃ 			n	nt.n.s		deathless, immortalitytesaṃ, 			pn	m.dat.pl	for them, to them, to thoseparibhuttaṃ 		pp	nt.n.s		consumed, eaten, enjoyedyesaṃ 			pn	m.dat.pl	for whoever, for whom, for which, for such and suchkāyagatāsati 		n	f.n.s		awareness immersed in the body, dwelling in the 								body, lit. mindfulness gone into the bodyparibhuttā”ti.		pp	f.n.s		consumed, eaten, enjoyedWhoever enjoyed awareness immersed in the body (32 parts of the body), those enjoyed deathless.  11.	DN 30.10dātā ca ahosi sukhumānaṃ mudukānaṃ attharaṇānaṃ pāvuraṇānaṃ	dātā 				n	m.n.s		giver, donor, bestowerca 				ind			andahosi 			v	aor.3.s	was, existed, becamesukhumānaṃ 		adj	m.gen.pl	of fine quality, exquisitemudukānaṃ 		adj	m.gen.pl	of soft, delicate, comfortableattharaṇānaṃ 		n	nt.gen.pl	of spread, cover, sheetpāvuraṇānaṃ		n	nt.gen.pl	of blanket, mantle, coverAnd he was a giver of fine quality soft sheets and blankets.12.	DN 22.5		 			seyyathā’pi, bhikkhave, ubhato-mukhā putoḷi pūrā nānāvihitassa dhaññassa, seyyath’idaṃ: sālīnaṃ vīhīnaṃ muggānaṃ māsānaṃseyyathā’pi, 		ind			just like, as if, imagine ifubhato-mukhā		adj	f.n.s		(bag) with an opening at each end putoḷi 			n	f.n.s		sowing bag (with an opening at each end)pūrā 				adj	f.n.s		full (of), filled (with)nānāvihitassa 		adj	m.gen.s	of various kinds of, many differentdhaññassa			n	nt.gen.s	of grainseyyath’idaṃ: 		ind			i.e., as follows, lit. (like) that like thissālīnaṃ 			n	m.gen.pl	of rice grainsvīhīnaṃ 			n	m.gen.pl	of rice paddymuggānaṃ 		n	m.gen.pl	of mung beansmāsānaṃ			n	m.gen.pl	of beansJust like sowing bag with an opening at each end  full of various kinds of grains, i.e. rice grains, rice paddy, mung beans, beans 	13.	AN 3.13			so ca hoti ... na lābhī annassa pānassa vatthassa yānassa mālā-gandha-vilepanassaso 				pn	m.n.s		he, thatca 				ind			but hoti 				v	pr.3.s		is, there isna 				ind			no, not, neither, norlābhī 				n	m.n.s		one who gains, who gets, who hasannassa			n	nt.gen.s	of food pānassa 			n	nt.gen.s	of drink, beveragevatthassa 			n	nt.gen.s	of cloth, clothes, robeyānassa 			n	nt.gen.s	of vehicle, carriage, wagon etc.mālā-gandha-vilepanassa	m.gen.s	of garlands, perfumes and oilsBut he is not one who gains food, drink, cloth, vehicle, garlands, perfumes and oils.  14.	MN 2.5	 		idha, bhikkhave, bhikkhu paṭisaṅkhā yoniso khamo hoti sītassa uṇhassa, jighacchāya pipāsāya.idha, 				ind			here, now, in this worldbhikkhu 			n	m.n.s		monkpaṭisaṅkhā 			v	ger		reflecting, carefully consideringyoniso 			ind			properly, prudently, thoroughly, intelligentlykhamo 			adj	m.n.s		patient (with), forbearing (with), enduring (of)hoti 				v	pr.3.s		is, there issītassa 			n	nt.gen.s	of cool; cold uṇhassa 			n	nt.gen.s	of hot, heat jighacchāya 		n	f.gen.s	of hunger, lit. desiring to eatpipāsāya.			n	f.gen.s	of thirstHere monk reflecting properly is enduring of cold, heat, hunger and thirst.15.	DN 4.3			samaṇo khalu bho gotamo rañño pasenadissa kosalassa sakkato garukato mānito pūjitosamaṇo 			n	m.n.s		ascetic, renunciant, holy man, monk, reclusekhalu				ind			indeed, surelybho				n	m.n.s		sir, master, friend, good man, you (respectful address)gotamo 			n	m.n.s		Gotama, of the Gotama familyrañño 			n	m.gen.s	of king, for kingpasenadissa 		n	m.gen.s	of Pasenadikosalassa 			n	m.gen.s	of of Kosala Kingdomsakkato 			pp	m.n.s		honouredgarukato 			pp	m.n.s		respected, honoured, worshippedmānito 			pp	m.n.s		esteemed, honoured, respected, worshippedpūjito				pp	m.n.s		worshipped, venerated, honouredRecluse master Gotama  indeed was honoured, respected, esteemed and worshipped by Pasenadi king of Kosala Kingdom16.	KN-a Dh.p.1.1.3“eso, mahārāja, maṃ jaṭāsu ca gīvāya ca akkami, nāhaṃ etaṃ kūṭajaṭilaṃ khamāpemī”ti.“eso,				pn	m.n.s		this mahārāja, 			n	m.voc.s	o great king, supreme rulermaṃ 				pn	1.ac.s	me (object)jaṭāsu			n	f.loc.pl	in dreadlocksca 				ind			and gīvāya 			n	f.loc.s	in neckca 				ind			and akkami, 			v	aor.3.s	stepped (on), trod (on)n’āhaṃ 			pn	1.n.s		I notetaṃ 				pn	m.ac.s	thiskūṭajaṭilaṃ 			n	m.ac.s	crooked dread-locked ascetic, false monkkhamāpemī”ti.		v	pr.1.s		I apologise, pardon, forgiveO great king, this man trod on my dreadlocks and neck. I do not forgive this false monk.